
APOLLO 13 MISSION REPORT 


DISTRIBUTION AND REFERENCING 


This poper is not suitable for general distribution ar referencing. It may be referenced 
only in other working correspondence and documents by participating organizations. 


ah MANNED SPACECRAFT CENTER 
“74 | HOUSTON.TEXAS 


oe SEPTEMBER 1970 



MSC-02680 


APOLLO 13 MISSION REPORT 


PREPARED BY 


Mission Evaluation Team 


APPROVED BY 





James A. McDivitt 
Colonel, USAF 
Manager, Apollo Spacecraft Program 


NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION 
MANNED SPACECRAFT CENTER 
HOUSTON, TEXAS 
September 1970 


1.0 SUMMARY 


The Apollo 13 mission, planned as a lunar landing in the Fra Mauro 
area, was aborted because of an abrupt loss of service module cryogenic 
oxygen associated with a fire in one of the two tanks at approximately 
56 hours. The lunar module provided the necessary support to sustain a 
minimum operational condition for a safe return to earth. A circumlunar 
profile was executed as the most efficient means of earth return, with 
the lunar module providing power and life support until transfer to the 
command module just prior to entry. Although the mission was unsuccess-— 
ful as planned, a lunar flyby and several scientific experiments were 
completed. 


The space vehicle, with a crew of James A. Lovell, Commandery; 
Fred W. Haise, Jr., Lunar Module Pilot; and John L. Swigert, Jr., Com- 
mand Module Pilot; was launched from Kennedy Space Center, Florida, at 
2:13:00 p.m. e.s.t. (19:13:00 G.m.t.) April 11, 1970. Two days before 
launch, the Command Module Pilot, as a member of the Apollo 13 backup 
crew, was substituted for his prime crew counterpart, who was exposed 
and found susceptible to rubella (German measles). Prior to launch, a 
network of meters was installed in the vicinity of the launch site to 
measure electrical phenomena associated with Saturn V ascent in support 
of findings from the Apollo 12 lightning investigation; satisfactory data 
were obtained. During S-II stage boost, an automatic shutdown of the 
center engine occurred because of a divergent dynamic structural condi- 
tion associated with that engine. Soon after the spacecraft was ejected, 
the S~IVB was maneuvered so as to impact on the lunar surface and provide 
seismological data. Following this maneuver, a series of earth photo- 
graphs were taken for later use in determining wind profiles in the upper 
atmosphere. The first midcourse correction inserted the spacecraft into 
a non-free-return trajectory. 


At approximately 56 hours, the pressure in cryogenic oxygen tank 2 
began to rise at an abnormally high rate and, within about 100 seconds, 
the tank abruptly lost pressure. The pressure in tank 1 also dropped 
but at a rate sufficient to maintain fuel cell 2 in operation for approx- 
imately 2 more hours. The loss of oxygen and primary power in the service 
module required an immediate abort of the mission. The crew powered up 
the lunar module, and the first maneuver following the incident was made 
with the descent propulsion system to place the spacecraft once again on 
a free-return trajectory. A second maneuver performed with the descent 
engine 2 hours after passing pericynthion reduced the transearth transit 
time and moved the earth landing point from the Indian Ocean to the South 
Pacific. Two small transearth midcourse corrections were required prior 
to entry. 


1-2 


The lunar module was jettisoned 1 hour before entry, which was 
performed nominally using the primary guidance and navigation system. 
Landing occurred at 142:54:41 within sight of the recovery ship. The 
landing point was reported as 21 degrees 38 minutes 24 seconds south 
latitude and 165 degrees 21 minutes 42 seconds west longitude. The crew 


were retrieved and aboard the recovery ship within 45 minutes after land- 
ing. 


2.0 INTRODUCTION 


Apollo 13 was the thirteenth in a series of missions using Apollo 
specification flight hardware and was to be the third lunar landing. 
The primary mission objective was a precise lwmar landing to conduct 
scientific exploration of deep-rooted surface material. 


Because an inflight anomaly in the cryogenic oxygen supply required 
an abort of the mission prior to insertion into lunar orbit, discussions 
of systems performance only relate to the abort profile and the system 
configurations required as a result of the emergency. A complete dis- 
cussion of the anomaly is presented in reference 1, and the abort profile 
is described in section 3. Because of the added criticality of onboard 
consumables, a discussion of usage profiles in both vehicles is contained 
in section 7. 


A complete analysis of all flight data is not possible within the 
time allotted for preparation of this report. Therefore, report supple- 
ments will be published for certain Apollo 13 systems analyses, as shown 
in appendix E. This appendix also lists the current status of all Apollo 
mission supplements, either published or in preparation. Other supple- 
ments will be published as the need is identified. 


In this report, all actual times prior to earth landing are elapsed 
time from range zero, established as the integral second before lift-off. 
Range zero for this mission was 19:13:00 G.m.t., April 11, 1970. All 
references to mileage distance are in nautical miles. 


3.0 MISSION DESCRIPTION 


The Apollo 13 mission was planned as a precision lunar landing in 
the Fra Mauro highiands. The most significant changes to the planned 
mission profile from Apollo 12 were the maneuver to impact the depleted 
S-IVB stage on the lunar surface and the performance of descent orbit 
insertion using the service propulsion system. The S-IVB impact was in- 
tended to provide seismological data sensed by the instrument left on 
the moon during Apollo 12. Performance of the descent orbit insertion 
using the service propulsion system provides a greater propellant margin 
in the lunar module descent propulsion system, and this reserve would 
have been available during the critical precision landing phase. 


Because of a sudden loss of pressure at approximately 5€ hours from 
one of the two service module cryogenic oxygen tanks in bay 4, primary 
electrical power was lost and the mission was atorted. Therefore, the 
remainder of this section will consider only the abort profile, since 
the trajectory prior to the tank incident was nearly identical to that 
of Apollo 12, including the first midcourse maneuver to a non-free-return 
profile, as shown in figure 3-l. The major trajectory difference from 
Apollo 12 resulted from an early shutdown of the center engine in the 
S-II stage of the ‘Saturn V, the subsequent staging and insertion times 
were somewhat late: than planned. A listing of significant mission events 
is contained in table 3-I. 


NASA-S-70-5824 Moon at 
earth landing 





o - 
Fourth Third $ 


5 midcourse 
midcourse 


correction correction 


S- IZB impact 








Transearth 


injection 
Second midcourse 


- 
a correction to enter 
a free-return 








First midcourse 
correction to enter 


non-free-retura / 


to lunar impact 





Trans lunar 
injection i 
Moon at 
lift-off 


Figure 3-1.- Apollo 13 mission profile. 


TABLE 3-I.— SEQUENCE OF EVENTS 


Time, 
hr:min:sec 


Range zero - 19:13:00:00 G.m.t., April ML, 1970 
Lift-off ~ 19:13:00.65 G.m.t., April 11, 1970 
S-IC outboard engine cutoff 

S~II engine ignition (command time) 

Launch escape tower jettison 

S-II engine cutoff 

S-IVB engine ignition (command time) 

S-IVB engine cutoff 

Translunar injection maneuver 

S-IVB/command and service module separation 
Docking 

Spacecraft ejection 

S-IVB separation maneuver 

First midcourse correction (service propulsion) 
Cryogenic oxygen tank incident 

Second midcourse correction (descent propulsion) 
S-IVB lunar impact 

Transearth injection (descent propulsion) 

Third midcourse correction (descent propulsion ) 
Fourth midcourse correction (IM reaction control) 
Command module/service module separation 
Undocking 

Entry interface 


Landing 





3-3 


After powering up the lunar module, co-aligning the two platforms, 
and shutting down all command and service module systems following the 
tank anomaly, a maneuver was immediately performed to return the space- 
craft to a free-return profile. The maneuver was performed as the second 
midcourse correction, using the descent propulsion system in the docked 
configuration, a mode tested successfully during Apollo 9. The resultant 
landing at earth would have been at 152 hours in the Indian Ocean, with 
lunar module systems intended to support the crew for the remaining 90 
hours. Because consumables were extremely marginal in this emergency 
mode and because only minimal recovery support existed at this earth 
landing location, a transearth injection maneuver using the descent pro- 
pulsion system was planned for execution 2 hours after passing pericyn- 
thion. Between these two maneuvers, an alignment check was made of the 
lunar module inertial platform to verify the maneuver would be executed 
with sufficient accuracy to permit a safe earth entry. 


The transearth injection maneuver was performed on time, and the 
transearth coast time was shortened such that landing was to occur at 
about 143 hours in the South Pacific, where primary recovery support was 
located. Guidance errors during this maneuver necessitated a small mid- 
course correction at about 105 hours to return the projected entry flight 
path angle to within specified limts. Following this firing, the space- 
craft was maneuvered into a passive thermal control mode, and all lunar 
module systems were powered down except those absolutely required to sup- 
port the crew. A final midcourse correction was performed 5 hours before 
entry to raise the entry flight-path angle slightly, and this maneuver 
was performed using the lunar module reaction control system under abort 
guidance control. 


The service module was separated 4-3/4 hours before entry, affording 
the crew an opportunity to observe and photograph the damaged bay 4 area. 
The command module was separated from the service module by using the 
lunar module reaction control system. The lunar module was retained for 
as long as possible to provide maximum electrical power in the command 
module for entry. 


The command module was powered up with the three entry batteries, 
which had been brought up to nearly full charge using lunar module power. 
Tne command module platform was aligned to the lunar module platform, and 
the spacecraft were undocked 70 minutes before entry. After undocking, 
the escaping tunnel pressure provided the necessary separation velocity 
between the two spacecraft. From this point, the mission was completed 
nominally, as in previous flights, with the spacecraft landing approxi- 
mately 1 mile from the target point. The lunar module, including the 
radioisotope thermoelectric fuel capsule used to power experiment equip- 
ment, entered the atmosphere and impacted in the open sea between Samoa 


3-4 


and New Zealand at 25.5 degrees south latitude and 176 degrees west lon- 
gitude, with surveillance aircraft in the area. The three crewmen were 
onboard the recovery ship, USS Iwo Jima, within 45 minutes of landing, 
the fastest recovery time for all Apollo manned flights. A narrative 
discussion of the flight and associated crew activities is presented in 
section 8.0 as a complementary description to this section. 


4.0 TRAJECTORY 


The planned trajectory profile was similar to that for Apollo 12 
except for descent orbit insertion being performed with the service pro- 
pulsion system and the targeting of the spent S-IVB stage for a lunar 
impact. The trajectory had been very close to the nominal flight plan 
up to the time of abort, which was the first in the Apollo program. 
Throughout the manned space program, techniques have been developed and 
tested for the real-time determination of immediate abort requirements, 
but Apollo 13 presented the first situation in which their use was neces- 
sary. Figure 3-1 shows the mission profile, including the relative loca- 
tions of all major maneuvers. 


The analysis of the trajectory from lift-off to spacecraft/S-IVB 
separation was based on launch vehicle onboard data, as reported in ref- 
erence 2, and from network tracking data. After separation, the actual 
trajectory information was determined from the best estimated trajectory 
generated from tracking and telemetry data. The earth and moon models 
used for the trajectory analysis are geometrically similar to those used 
for Apollo 12. Table 3-I is a listing of major flight events, and table 
4-I defines the trajectory and maneuver parameters listed in table 4-II. 


The planned launch and earth parking orbit phases for this mission 
were very similar to those for Apollo 12. However, during the second 
stage (S-II) boost into the planned 100-mile circular parking orbit, the 
center engine cut off about 132 seconds early and caused the remaining 
four engines to burn approximately 34 seconds longer than predicted (as 
discussed in section 13.0 and reference 2). Space vehicle velocity after 
S-II boost was 223 ft/sec lower than planned, and as a result, the S-IVB 
orbital insertion maneuver was approximately 9 seconds longer than pre- 
dicted, with cutoff velocity within about 1.2 ft/sec of the planned value. 
The total time to orbital insertion was about 44 seconds longer than pre- 
dicted, with actual]. parking orbit parameters of 100.2 by 98.0 miles. 


As on Apollo 12, the S-IVB was targeted for a high~pericynthion 
free-return translunar profile, with the first major spacecraft maneuver 
intended to lower the pericynthion to the planned orbital altitude of 
60 miles. Upon execution of this maneuver, the spacecraft was intention- 
ally placed on a non-free-return trajectory. The achieved pericynthion 
altitude at translwnar injection was 415.8 miles. The accuracy of the 
translunar injection maneuver was such that the option for the first 
planned midcourse correction was not exercised. The velocity change re- 
quired at the second planned midcourse option point, intended as the time 
for entering the non-~free-return profile, was 23.2 ft/sec. The trajectory 
parameters for the translunar injection and all spacecraft maneuvers are 
presented in table 4-II. 


4.2 


TABLE 4-I.- DEFINITION OF TRAJECTORY AND ORBITAL PARAMETERS 


Trajectory Parameters Definition 
Geodetic latitude Spacecraft position measured north or south from 
the earth's equator to the local vertical vector, 
deg 
Selenographic latitude Spacecraft position measured north or south from 


the true lunar equatorial plane to the local ver- 
tical vector, deg 


Longitude Spacecraft position measured east or west from the 
body's prime meridian to the local vertical vec-— 
tor, deg 

Altitude Perpendicular distance from the reference body to 


the point of orbit intersect, feet or miles; alti- 
tude above the lunar surface is referenced to the 
altitude of the landing site with respect to mean 
luner radius 


Space-fixed velocity Magnitude of the inertial velocity vector refer- 
enced to the body-centered, inertial reference 
coordinate system, ft/sec 


Space-fixed flight-path angle Flight-path angle measured positive upward from 
the body-centered, local horizontal plane to the 
inertial velocity vector, deg 


Space-fixed heading angle Angle of the projection of the inertial velocity 
vector onto the local body-centered, horizontal 
Plane, measured positive eastward from north, deg 


Apogee Maximum altitude above the oblate earth model, miles 
Perigee Minimum altitude above the oblate earth model, miles 
Apocynthion Maximum altitude above the moon model, referenced 


to landing site altitude, miles 


Pericynthion Minimum altitude above the moon model, referenced 
to landing site altitude, miles 


Period Time required for spacecraft to complete 360 de~ 
grees of orbit rotation, min 

Inclination : Acute angle formed at the intersection of the orbit 
plane and the reference body's equatorial plane, 
deg 

Longitude of the ascending Longitude where the orbit plane crosses the ref- 


node erence body's equatorial plane from below, deg 


TABLE 4-II.— TRAJECTORY PARAMETERS 












Translunar phase 





































\ Altitude Space-fixed Space-fixed Space-fixed 
Reference Time, Latitude, Longitude, | anove launch velecity, flight-path heading angle, 
body brsmin:sec deg deg . pad, miles ft/sec angle, deg deg E of N 

















S-IVB second ignition Earth 2:35:h6.4 22.488 142.45E 032 65.708 
S-IVB second cutoff Earth 2:41:37.2 9.398 7.182 59.443 
Translunar injection Earth 2:41:47 .2 8.92S 7.635 59.318 | 






Command and service 


module/S~IVB separation 






Docking 






Spacecraft/S-IVB sepa- 
ration 














First midcourse correction 
Ignition 
Cutoff 








101.85W 
101 .86W 








121 385.43 4 685.6 













Second midcourse correction 
Ignition 
Cutoff 






188 371.38 3 065.8 
188 393.19 3 093.2 


159.TOE 
159.56E 






79.934 116.54 


Transearth phase 









j Transearth injection 
Ignition 
Cutoff 









.0 | | 65.46E 5 465.26 | 4 547.7 
é 64.77E 5 658.68 5 020.2 







Third midcourse correction 
Ignition 
Cutoff 






136.84W | 152 224.32 4 457.8 
136.90W | 152 215.52 4 456.6 








Fourth midcourse correction 
Ignition 
Cutoff 





113.39E 37 808.58 1@ 109.1 
113.32E 37 776.05 10 114.6 







108.77E 35 694.93 10 405.9 





Service module separation 





77 .55E 11 257.48 27 465.9 






Undocking 


Entry interface 173.44E 





Ent 


44 


The discarded S-IVB stage was targeted for a lunar impact of 3 de- 
grees south latitude and 30 degrees west longitude. The S-IVB maneuver 
to achieve lunar impact was initiated at 6 hours, with a firing duration 
of 217 seconds using the auxiliary propulsion system. At approximately 
19 hours 17 minutes, tracking data indicated the S-IVB had acquired an 
unexplained velocity increase of about 5 ft/sec along a projected earth 
radius which altered the projected lwmar impact point closer to the tar- 
get. The stage impacted the lunar surface at 77:56:40 and at a location 
of 2.4 degrees south latitude and 27.9 degrees west longitude. The tar- 
geted impact point was 125 miles from the Apollo 12 seismometer, and the 
actual point was 74 miles away, well within the desired 189 mile radius. 
The S-IVB impact results are discussed in section 11.0. 


The accuracy of the first midcourse correction (table 4-II), which 
placed the spacecraft on the non-free-return trajectory, was such that a 
maneuver was not required at the third planned option point. However, 
because of the oxygen tank incident, a 38-ft/sec midcourse maneuver was 
performed at 61:29:44 using the descent engine to return the spacecraft 
to a free-return trajectory. This maneuver alone would have caused the 
command module to nominally land in the Indian Ocean south of Mauritius 
Island at approximately 152 hours. 


At 2 hours beyond pericynthion, a second descent propulsion maneuver 
was performed to shorten the return time and move the earth landing point 
to the South Pacific. The 263.8-second maneuver produced a velocity change 
of 860.5 ft/sec and resulted in an initial predicted earth landing point 
in the Pacific Ocean at 142:53:00. The transearth trip time was thus re- 
duced by about 9 hours. 


The first transearth midcourse correction (table 4-III), was per- 
formed at 105:18:28 using the descent propulsion system. The firing was 
conducted at 10 percent throttle and produced a velocity change of about 
7.8 ft/sec to successfully raise the entry flight-path angle to minus 
6.52 degrees. 


Spacecraft navigation for the aborted mission proceeded satisfactor- 
ily. Post-pericynthion navigation procedures were designed to support 
transearth injection, and special data processing procedures were re- 
quired for dual vehicle tracking prior to entry. Less range data than 
usual were received from tracking stations during the abort phase because 
the power amplifier in the spacecraft was turned off for most of the time 
to conserve electrical power. The small amounts of range data received 
and the resulting large data arcs, however, were sufficient to maintain 
navigation accuracies approximately equivalent to those of Apollo 12. 


TABLE 4~III.- MANEUVER SUMMARY 


(a) Translunar 





Resultant pericynthion conditions 
Firing Velocity 
change, 





Pericynthion 
arrival time, 


Altitude 
avove Landing 


Ignition time, 


r i Velecity, Latitude, Longitude , 
hr:min:sec 


Maneuver 


ft/sec site, miles ft/sec deg brimin:sec 
1 Trenslunar injection | S-IVB 12:35:46.4 = Le 350.8 =} 16 039 ab. 818h.u | l.uN 178.528 11:56:22 = | 
First midcourse Service propulsion 30:40:49.6 | 3.5 | 23.2 | 8277.9 | 3.34N 178.93E 77: 28: 39 
correction 
Second midcourse Descent. propulsion 61:29:43.5 34.2 37.8 136.2 8053.4 3.02N 179.29 TTs20: ST 
correctien | 





(b) Transearth 














Firing Velocity Resultant entry interface condition 


time, change, 
sec ft/sec 













Ignition time, 
hr:min: sec 

























Maneuver cystem Entry 
arrival time, 


nr:min: sec 


Plight-path 
angle, deg 


Velocity, 
ft/sec 


Latitude, 
deg 


Longitude, 
deg 





















Transearth injection Descent propulsion 79:27:39 No entry (vacuum perigee = 80.6 miles) 















Third midcourse Descent propulsion 105:14: 28 36 230.6 28.228 142;40:47 


correction 


173. 49E 






















Fourth midcourse Lunar module reaction 137: 39:51.5 36 210.9 28.235 142:b0; 46 


correction control 


173.46E 


a 





anh 


4-6 


The unusual spacecraft configuration required that new procedures 
for entry be developed and verified. The resulting timeline called for 
a final midcourse correction 5 hours before entry, separation of the 
service module 4 hours 39 minutes before entry, and undocking of the 
lunar module at 1 hour 11 minutes before entry. Service module separa- 
tion was performed using the lunar module reaction control system. Sep- 
aration velocity following lunar module undocking was provided using 
pressure in the docking tunnel. 


The final midcourse correction maneuver used the lunar module reac- 
tion control system. Landing occurred at 142:54:41 in the Pacific Ocean 
at 21 degrees 38.4 minutes south latitude and 165 degrees 21.7 minutes 
west longitude, which was about 1 mile from the target point. 


5.0 COMMAND AND SERVICE MODULE PERFORMANCE 


The performance of the command and service module systems is dis- 
cussed in this section. The sequential, pyrotechnic, service propulsion, 
thermal protection, earth landing, and emergency detection systems and 
all displays, controls, and crew provisions operated essentially as in- 
tended and are not discussed. The pyrotechnic system, which performed 
all desired functions, did exhibit two minor anomalies, which are dis- 
cussed only in sections 14.1.6 and 14.1.10 of the Anomaly Summary, and 
two discrepancies in the operation of crew equipment were noted, these 
being discussed in sections 14.3.1 and 14.3.2 of the Anomaly Summary. 
Except for these four cases, all other anomalies are generally mentioned 
in this section but are discussed in greater detail in the Anomaly Sum- 
mary. 


D.L STRUCTURAL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS 


At lift-off, measured winds, both at the surface and in the region 
of maximum dynamic pressure, and accelerometer data indicate that struc- 
tural loads were well below the established limits during all phases of 
flight. The predicted and calculated spacecraft: loads at lift-off, in 
the region of maximum dynamic pressure, at the end of first stage boost, 
and during staging were similar to or less than previous Apollo Saturn V 
launches. Command module accelerometer data prZ.or to S-IC center-engine 
cutoff indicate longitudinal oscillations similar to those measured on 
previous flights. Although longitudinal oscillations in the S-II engine 
structure and propellant system caused early shutdown of the center en- 
gine, the vibrations at the spacecraft during S-II boost had an amplitude 
less than 0.05g at a frequency of 16 hertz. The maximum oscillation mea- 
sured during either of the two S-IVB thrust periods was 0.06g, also at a 
frequency of 16 hertz. Oscillations during all four launch vehicle boost 
phases were within acceptable spacecraft structural design limits. 


All mechanical systems functioned properly. One mechanical anomaly, 
however, was a gas leak from one of two breech assemblies in the apex 
cover jettison system, and this problem is discussed in section 14.1.6. 

In addition, docking tunnel insulation, which normally remains with the 
lunar module after separation, was noted from photographs to have cracked 
and expanded radially. Since the cracking is believed to occur during 
pyrotechnic firing and has been seen in past flights, it is not a problem. 


Structural temperatures remained within acceptable limits throughout 
the mission. However, because of the long cold--soak period following 
powering down, the command module structure exhibited significantly lower 
temperatures than has been observed in previous flights. 


5.2 ELECTRICAL POWER 


5.2.1 Batteries 


Command module battery performance was acceptable throughout the 
mission. Entry battery C had been isolated throughout the flight, and 
at 58 hours 40 minutes, batteries A and B were also isolated from the 
spacecraft buses. Batteries A and B were charged a total of three times 
each during the flight, including once each using power from the lunar 
module. Following the cryogenic oxygen incident, battery A was twice 
placed on main bus A to support spacecraft load requirements. Preentry 
procedures were conducted with the lunar module supplying power to the 
command module main bus B through the command and service module/lunar 
module umbilical and with entry battery C supplying power to main bus A. 
This configuration was maintained from 6 hours 30 minutes prior to entry 
until 2 hours 30 minutes prior to entry, at which time the lunar module 
batteries were disconnected and all electrical power loads were assumed 
by the command module entry batteries. 


5.2.2 Fuel Cells 


Prior to lift-off, the crew experienced erratic readings from all 
three fuel cell flow indicators when cycling the switch, but system oper- 
ation was normal. 


During the flight, the three fuel cells operated as expected until 
the sudden loss of pressure in cryogenic oxygen tank 2, as discussed in 
section 14.1.1. Fuel cell 3 condenser exit temperature varied periodic- 
ally. A behavior present on all previous flights, and characteristic of 
the system under certain operating conditions. Soon after the loss of 
oxygen pressure in tank 2, fuel cells 1 and 3 lost power and were shut 
down. Fuel cell 2 sustained the total command and service module load 
until the depletion of oxygen pressure in tank l. 


Unusual variations in the oxygen flow rates to all three fuel cells 
were observed in the 3-minute period preceding the tank pressure loss, 
These variatims were caused by the simultaneous pressure excursions tak- 
ing place in eryogenic oxygen tank 2. The fuel cell 1 regulated nitrogen 
pressure indication went to the lower limit of the measurement when the 
pressure in cryogenic oxygen tank 2 dropped. Analysis of related fuel 
cell parameters confirmed this discrepancy to be a loss of instrumenta- 
tion readout and not an actual loss of the regulated nitrogen pressure. 
Performance of fuel cells 1 and 3 degraded within 3 minutes after the 
oxygen tank 2 pressure dropped. The degradation is considered to have 
been caused by the fuel cell oxygen shutoff valves closing abruptly be- 
cause of the shock generated when the bay 4 panel separated. Amore de- 
tailed discussion is contained in reference 1. 


>=3 


During the missicn, the fuel cells supplied approximately 120 kW-h 
of energy at an average current of approximately 24 amperes per fuel cell 
and at an average bus voltage of 29.4 volts. 


5.3 CRYOGENIC STORAGE 


Cryogenic storage system operation was satisfactory until 46:40:09, 
when the quantity indication was lost for oxygen tank 2 (section 14.1.1). 
At about 56 hours, the pressure in oxygen tank 2 suddenly dropped to zero 
and the pressure in oxygen tank 1 began to decay until all primary oxygen 
was lost. As a result, power was lost from fuel cells 1 and 3, and after 
oxygen was essentially depleted from tank 1, fuel cell 2 was taken off- 
line. After the flight, a comprehensive review of the history of cryo- 
genic oxygen tank 2 was made to determine whether an unfavorable condi- 
tion could have existed prior to launch. This review included test 
records, materials review dispositions, and failure reports. No positive 
indication of any tnfavorable conditions prior to shipment to the launch 
site could be found in the testing or inspections conducted. However, 
to accomplish a modification on the vac-ion pumps, the complete oxygen 
shelf, including the oxygen tanks, was removed from the service module 
structure during which the oxygen shelf was accidentally dropped with 
no apparent damage. 


After initial cryogenic oxygen filling during the countdown demon- 
stration test at Kennedy Space Center, tank 2 could not be detanked using 
the normal procedures. The problem resulted from loose or misaligned 
plumbing components in the dog-leg portion of the tank fill path. After 
numerous attempts using gaseous oxygen purges and higher expulsion pres- 
sures, the fluid was boiled off through the use of the tank heaters and 
fans, assisted by pressure cycling. During the detanking sequence, the 
heaters were on for about 8 hours, but it was believed that no damage 
would be sustained by the tank or its components because of the protec- 
tion afforded by internal thermal switches. However, the use of the 
heaters in detanking required that the switches open under a load of 
6 amperes at 65 V dc, twice the normal flight operating conditions, for 
each heater. Tests show that opening the switches under these conditions 
will fuse the contacts closed and eventually damage fan motor wire insu- 
lation. It is this damage which is believed to have caused the inflight 
failure in tank 2 and loss of pressure. 


Consumable quantities in the cryogenic storage system are dis- 
cussed in section 7.1. 


5h 
5.4 COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT 


The communications system satisfactorily supported the mission. Both 
S-band and VHF communications were used until translunar injection, after 
which the VHF was turmed off and the S-band equipment was used until space- 
craft power-down at approximately 58 hours. S-band and VHF voice, color 
television pictures, and real-time and playback telemetry were satisfac- 
tory. Uplink and downlink signal strengths corresponded to preflight 
predictions. Communications system management, including antenna switch- 
ing, was good. 


Prior to the television broadcast at approximately 55 hours, diffi- 
culty was experienced with high-gain antenna acquisition for approximately 
12 minutes. After a change in spacecraft attitude, satisfactory acquisi- 
tion was accomplished. Further details concerning this problem are dis- 
cussed in section 14.1.4. 


At approximately 56 hours, the high-gain antenna experienced an ap- 
parent switch from narrow to wide beamwidth, with a resultant temporary 
loss of telemetry data. This occurrence coincided with the oxygen tank 
pressure loss. Post-separation photographs of the service module show 
damage to the high-gain antenna, which is attributed to the loss of a 
service module outer panel. This damage, as discussed in reference 1, 
caused the beam switch and the resultant loss of data. 


From 101:53:00 to 102:02:00 and from 123:05:00 to 123:12:00, the 
communications system was powered up to the extent necessary to transmit 
high-bit-rate telemetry data using the omnidirectional antennas. The 
S-band system was turned on for verification prior to undocking and per- 
formed nominally. The VHF/AM and VHF recovery systems were turned on at 
parachute deployment and operated nominally throughout recovery. 


5.5 INSTRUMENTATION 


The instrumentation system performed normally except for the follow- 
ing discrepancies, both of which have occurred on previous flights. The 
suit pressure measurement indicated 0.5 psi below cabin pressure until 
the command module was powered down. However, when the command module 
was powered up at 123 hours, the measurement indicated correct values, 
as discussed in section 14.1.9. The potable water quantity measurement 
operated erratically for a brief period early in the mission. This anom- 
aly is described in section 14.1.8. The pressure, temperature, and quan- 
tity measurements for oxygen tank 2, along with the fuel cell 1 nitrogen 
pressure transducer failure, are discussed in section 14.1.1, since the 
anomalous performance of these systems is related to the tank incident. 


a2 


The service propulsion auxiliary propellant gaging system failed prior 
to launch and a measurement waiver was granted. The failure, which re- 
sulted in shorting of the instrumentation power supply, was caused from 
fuel leakage into the point sensor module within the tank. Similar fail- 
ures have occurred on previous flights, and since this system is inde- 
pendent of the primary gaging system, which was operating properly, per- 
formance of the mission was not affected. 


5.6 GUIDANCE, NAVIGATION, AND CONTROL 


Performance of the guidance, navigation, and control system was 
normal except for two instances. Random motion observed in the sextant 
shaft during the zero optics mode was operationally prevented by turning 
off power to the optical system when not in use. This problem occurred 
during Apollo 12 and is thought to be caused by a buildup of contact 
resistance in the slip rings of the half-speed resolver in the sextant 
(section 14.1.3). The crew reported the 0.05g light did not illuminate 
as required within 3 seconds after the digital computer had indicated 
0.05g. A manual procedure was therefore required to start the entry 
monitor system, which performed nominally throughout the remainder of 
entry (section 14.1.5). As a result of the aborted mission, all power 
was removed from the inertial platform, including heaters, for apsproxi- 
mately 80 hours. After powering up and coarse aligning the platform to 
that of the lunar module, the command module was guided to a successful 
landing within approximately 1 mile of the target location. Because of 
power restrictions, the circuit breaker for the data storage equipment 
recorder was left open during entry, and no entry data are available for 
an entry performance analysis. 


Ail attitude control functions were satisfactory. Initial separa- 
tion from the S-IVB was performed by thrusting for 4.28 seconds to impart 
a velocity change of 0.86 ft/sec. After a manual pitch maneuver, the 
command and service modules were docked with the lunar module. Rate dis- 
turbances noted at docking were 0.16 deg/sec peak in pitch and yaw, and 
0.60 deg/sec peak in roll. 


The passive thermal control modes attempted at 7:43:02 and 32:21:h9 
were not successful and had to be reinitiated. The attempt at 7:43:02 
resulted in a divergent coning angle because the roll rate was established 
using one rather than two roll engines, as required by the checklist. In 
addition, an incorrect roll rate was loaded into the digital autopilot. 
The attempt at 32:21:49 resulted in a divergent coning angle because an 
unplanned minimum impulse engine firing occurred 13 seconds after initia- 
ting the roll rate. The engine firing command (two negative roll engines) 
was generated when the roll manual attitude switch was changed from the 
rate-command position to the acceleration-command position. The engine 


5-6 


firing could have been avoided procedurally by disabling all engines be- 
fore doing any control system switching. The passive thermal control mode 
attempted at 32:21:49 is compared with a typical case in figure 5.6-1, 
which shows the adverse effects of two extraneous firings. All subse- 
quent passive thermal control modes using the command and service module 
were established normally. 


NASA-S- 70-5825 









Typical successful 
docked maneuver 


60 min from initiation 
Ty ye 


i] Yaw gimbal angle, veg 
6 8 10 12 14 lo 18 
> . 


356 











Divergent case 
resulting from 
extraneous firings 


18 min fron 


> A initiation 


119 min from 
initiation 








84 


82 


Pitch gimbal angle, deg 


80 


43 min fram 
initiation 


78 


76 


Figure 5.6-l1.- Comparison of early translunar maneuver to 
establish a passive thermal control mode. 


At the time of the oxygen tank incident, three events took place 
that affected control system performance: the quad C isolation valves 
closed (as discussed in section 14.1.1), a voltage transient caused a 
computer restart, and the digital autopilot re-initialized the attitude 
to which it was referenced. The response of the digital autopilot to 
these events was as programmed, and rate and attitude errors were reduced 
to a nulled condition within 75 seconds. Reference 1 contains a more 
complete discussion of spacecraft dynamics during and after the oxygen 
tank anomaly. 


oat 


The only translation maneuver performed with the service propulsion 
system was the first midcourse correction. Spacecraft dynamics during 
this maneuver were nominal, and significant translation parameters are 
shown in the following table. 


First midcourse 
Parameter ; 
correction 


Time 
Ignition, hr:min:sec 30:40:49 .65 
Cutoff, hr:min:sec 30:40 :53.14 
Duration, min:sec 3.49 
Velocity gained, ft/sec* 
(desired/actual ) 
x -13.1/-13.2 
Y -14.7/-14.5 
Z -12.2/-12.3 


Velocity residual, ft/sec 
(spacecraft coordinates )** 
xX 
Y 
Z 
Entry monitor system 


Engine gimbal. position, deg 
Initial 
Pitch 
Yaw 
Maximum excursion 
Pitch 
Yaw 
Steady-state 
Pitch 
Yaw 
Cutoff 
Pitch 
Yaw 


Maximum rate excursion, deg/sec 
Pitch 
Yaw 
Roll 


Maximum attitude error, deg 
Pitch 
Yaw 
Roll 





*Velocity gained in earth-centered inertial coordinates. 
**Velocity residuals in spacecraft coordinates after 
trimming has been completed. 


The crew reported a pitch-up disturbance torque was exerted on the 
command module soon after undocking until the beginning of entry. Most 
of this time, only low-bit-rate telemetry was available and therefore a 
detailed analysis is impossible. A 20-minute segment of high-bit-rate 
data was received just prior to entry, and an unaccountable pitch-up 
torque of 0.001 deg/sec* was observed. The possible contributing causes 
for this torque could have been gravity gradients, atmospheric trimming, 
venting through the umbilical, venting through the tunnel hatch, and a 
gradual propellant leak. However, none of these is considered to have 
been a single cause, and either a combination of these causes was present 
or some undetermined venting took place. 


Table 5.6-I is a summary of gyro drift measurements deduced from 
inflight alignments. The null-bias drift coefficients for all three gyros 
were updated at 32 hours, based upon drift rates calculated from four 
platform alignments. The alignment prior to entry was performed by first 
conducting a coarse alignment to the lunar module platform and then using 
the automatic optics positioning capability to locate stars for a precise 
alignment. This technique was necessary because of the difficulty in 
recognizing constellations through the scanning telescope as a result 
of reflections from the lunar module and obscuration by vented particles. 


TABLE 5.6-I.- PLATFORM ALIGNMENT SUMMARY 





Star angle Gyro torgquing angles, 


Star used difference, 
deg 


Time Option Gyro drift, mERU 


Arimin code 


26 Spica, 33 Antares 
35 Rasalhague, 44 Enif 
20 Dnoces, 27 Alkaid 
31 Arcturus, 36 Vega ‘ f : 4 : . Check star 36 
30 Menkent, 32 Alphecca ‘ * . : i Check etar 35 
23 Denebola, 32 Alphecca 4 a Check star 31 
From lunar module primary 
guidance 

















36 Vega, 40 Altair 


Soreferred alignment 
Reference matrix (REFSMMAT ) 


“coarse alignment 


Table 5.6-II summarizes the inertial component preflight histories. 
Velocity differences between the S-IVB instrument unit and the command 
module platform during earth ascent indicate a 75-ft/sec difference in 
the Y-axis. A Y-axis difference is typical of a command module platform 
gyrocompassing misalignment at lift-off. However, the Y-axis error mag- 
nitude is not typical and is the largest observed during ascent to date. 
The cause of the discrepancy was the magnitude of the null bias drift 


or? 
TABLE 5.6-I1.~ INERTIAL COMPONENT PREFLIGHT HISTORY 


_—— 

















Error Sample Standard | Nuaber of | Countdown | Flight eb iytht ave roe Light averwn 
| mean deviation samples value loud thelore update urter upduts 
Accelerometers 
X-Seule factor error, ppm... . 7 =195 = 7 -199 -00 
Bias, ca/see> 2. -0.18 0.07 1 -0.26 ae 0.21 must 
Y-Scale factor error, ppm... - =IE4 , 3u zg -194 -190 
Bias, dafaee We aoe cab Sos har eng’ 7 
Z-Scale factor error, ppm... + i 
Bias, cm/sec” be pete a Gece ae 











X-Null bias drift, mERU. .... 





Acceleration drift, spin refer- 
ence axis, mERU/g ....... 


Acceleration drift, input 
exis, mMERU/g .. 1... 1 eee 


Y-Null bias drift, mERU..... 


Acceleration drift, spin refer- 
ence axis, mEMU/g.. 1... 


Acceleration drift, input 
axis, MERU/g . 2. 22 ee eee 





2-Null bias drift, mERU..... 





Acceleration drift, spin refer- 
ence axis, mERU/g......- 





Acceleration drift, input. 
exis, mERU/g .....5205. Hi 





“updated to -0.167 at 141:30:00 
Windated to +0.6 at 32:04:29 
“Updated to -1.2 at 32:04:29 
Supdeted to -2.9 at 32:04:29 


coefficient for the X-axis, which was still within specified limits; this 
coefficient being the most sensitive contributor to the gyrocompassing 
misalignment. Table 5.6-III is a set of error sources which reproduce 
the velocity errors observed during ascent. 


After the oxygen tank incident, the platform was used as a reference 
to which the lunar module platform was aligned. All power to the guid- 
ance and navigation system, including the inertial measurment wnit heaters, 
was removed at about 55 hours. Heater power was. applied about 80 hours 
later, when the inertial measurement unit was put into standby and the 
computer turned on. Based upon ground test data and two short periods 
of telemetry, the minimum temperature is estimated to have reached 55° or 
60° F before power--up. The only significant coefficient shift observed 
after the long cold soak was in the Z-axis accelerometer bias. The shift 
was compensated for by an update at 141 hours from minus 0.04 em/sec* to 
the new value of minus 1.66 em/sec?. Although no gyro measurements were 
obtained just prior to entry, the precision of the landing indicated no 
large misalignments. 


5-10 
TABLE 5.6-III.- INERTIAL COMPONENT ERRORS DURING LAUNCH 


compensated = 
Error term Uncomp One sigma 
error specification 


Offset velocity, ft/sec 








Seale factor error, 
Xe) Cet ak et ahs 


Y 





Null bias drift, mERU 
Xe es Mat al a 3h 


Ye mos 





Acceleration drift, 
axis mERU/g, 
Zioats 4 Gieae 


Acceleration drift, spin 
reference axis, mERU/g 
Y 





Several entry monitor system bias tests were made during the flight. 
The associated accelerometer exhibited a stability well within specifi- 
cation limits. Results of each test are given in the following table. 


5-11 


Time Velocity 
Time interval, change, 
sec ft/sec 


Accelerometer 
bias, ft/sec? 







Before translunar injection 
After translunar injection 
+156 +0.018 


10 hours 5 minutes 


29 hours HO minutes 





tla +0 .015 


5. REACTION CONTROL 


5.7.1 Service Module 


All service moduie reaction control parameters were normal from 
lift-off to the time of the oxygen tank anomaly. A total of 55 pounds 
of propellant was used for the initial separation from the S-IVB, the 
turnaround maneuver, docking and ejection. Prior to the tank anomaly, 
propellant usage was 137 pounds, 33 pounds less than predicted for that 
point in the mission. 


Following the anomaly, all reaction control quads except C began 
showing evidence of frequent engine firings. Data show that all propel- 
lant isolation valves on quad C, both helium isolation valves on quad D, 
and one helium isolation valve on quad B were shocked to the closed posi- 
tion at the time of the oxygen tank pressure loss. On quad D, the regu- 
lated pressures dropped momentarily as the engines fired with the helium 
isolation valves closed. ‘The crew reopened the quad D valves, and the 
engines functioned normally thereafter. Because the quad C propellant 
isolation valves are powered from bus B, which lost power, the valves 
could not be reopened and the quad remained inactive for the remainder 
of the flight. 


During the peak engine activity period after the oxygen tank inci- 
dent, engine package temperatures reached as high as 203° F, which is 
normal for the commanded duty cycles. All reaction control data were 
normal for the configuration and duty cycles that existed, including the 
quad C data which showed the system in a nonuse configuration because the 
isolation valves were closed. System data were normal when checked prior 
to entry at about 123 hours, at which time the total propellant consumed 
was 286 pounds (& pounds from quad A, 65 from B, 33 from C, and 102 
from D). 


5-le 


5.7.2 Command Module 


The command module reaction control system helium pressures and tem- 
peratures and the helium manifold pressures were normal from lift-off to 
system activation just prior to entry. The pressures before activation 
reflected the general cooling of the system resulting from the powered 
down configuration of the command module. The helium source temperatures 
dropped from 70° to about 35° F during the mission. Prior to system acti- 
vation the lowest engine injector temperature was 15° F. A preheat cycle 
brougnt injector temperatures to acceptable levels and hot firing checks 
were satisfactory. 


Just prior to undocking, two injector temperatures were 5° F below 
minimum. However, engine operation was expected to be normal, despite 
the low temperatures, and undocking was performed without heating the 
engines. 


System decontamination at Hawaii was normal, except that the sys- 
tem 1 fuel isolation valve was found to be in the open position. All 
other propellant isolation valves were in the normal (closed) position. 
Power from ground servicing equipment was used to close the valve, which 
operated normally. Postflight investigation of this condition revealed 
that the electrical lead from the system 1 fuel-valve closing coil was 
miswired, making it impossible to apply power to this coil. This anom- 
aly is discussed in section py losaie ge 


All available flight data and the condition of the system prior to 
deactivation at Hawaii indicate that the system performed normally from 
activation through the propellant dump and purge operation. 


5.8 ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL 


During the periods when it was activated, the command module environ- 
mental control system performed normally. From the time of powering down 
at approximately 58 hours until reactivation approximately 1-1/2 hours 
before entry, environmental control for the interconnected cabins was 
maintained using lunar module equipment. Two anomalies associated with 
the environmental control instrumentation occurred and are discussed in 
sections 14.1.8 and 14.1.9. An additional discrepancy, noted after land- 
ing and discussed in section 10.3, was the position of the inlet postland- 
ing ventilation valve at the time of recovery. This discrepancy is dis- 
cussed in section 14.1.2. 


The oxygen distribution system operated nominally until deactivation 
following the cryogenic tank incident. The suit compressor was turned 
off at 56:19:58, and with the repressurization package off line, the surge 


5-13 


tank was isolated 17 minutes later at an indicated pressure of 858 psia. 
The 20-psi system was reactivated briefly four times from the surge tank 
to pressurize the command module potable water system. Further discus- 

sion of oxygen usage is presented in section 7.1. System operation for 

entry was satisfactory, with the suit compressor limited to a period of 

operation of only 22 minutes to conserve electrical power. 


During the period when the command module was powered down, the cabin 
temperature slowly decreased to approximately 43° F and considerable 
amounts of moisture condensed on the spacecraft windows and the command 
module structure. Thermal control, after powering up at 140 hours, was 
satisfactory, although the cabin temperature remained very cold during 
entry. The command module potable water served as the main drinking sup- 
ply for the crew during the mission, and approximately 14 pounds were 
withdrawn after powering down, using the 8-ounce plastic bags. The crew 
reported at approximately 120 hours they were unable to withdraw water 
from the potable tank and assumed it was empty. Approximately 6 hours 
after landing, the recovery crew was also unable to obtain a water sample 
from either the potable or waste water tanks. Tne recovery personnel 
stated the structure near the tank and lines was very cold to touch, and 
an analysis of temperatures during the flight in this vicinity show that 
freezing in the lines most likely occurred. This freezing condition could 
have existed at the time a sample was to be taken. When the spacecraft 
was returned to the manufacturer's plant, 24.3 pounds were drained from 
the potable tank. The water system was subsequently checked and was found 
to operate properly. Both the hot and cold potable water contained gas 
bubbles. To eliminate these gas bubbles, which had also been experienced 
on previous missions, a gas separator cartridge was provided but not used. 


The auxiliary dump nozzle was used for the first time on an Apollo 
mission. Dumping through this nozzle was discontinued and urine was sub- 
sequently stored onboard because a considerable number of particles were 
evident on the hatch window and these interfered with navigation sight- 
ings. 


Upon recovery, the outlet valve of the postlanding ventilation was 
open and the inlet valve was closed, whereas both valves should have been 
open. This condition is reported in section 10.3.2, and the anomaly is 
discussed in section 14.1.2. 


6.0 LUNAR MODULE PERFORMANCE 


The performance of the lunar module systems is discussed in this 
section. All systems that are not discussed either performed as intended 
or were not used. Discrepancies and anomalies are generally mentioned 
but are discussed in greater detail in the Anomaly Summary, sections 14.2 
and 14.3. 


6.1 STRUCTURAL 


The structural evaluation is based on guidance and control data, 
cabin pressure measurements, command module acceleration data, photo- 
graphs, and crew comments. 


Based on measured command module accelerations and on simulations 
using actual. launch wind data, lumar module loads were within structural 
limits during launch anid translunar injection. Loads during docking and 
service propulsion and descent prcpulsion maneuvers were also within 
structural limits. 


Data telemetered during the oxygen tank incident indicate the pres-~ 
ence of body bending oscillations in the docked spacecraft. The associ- 
ated amplitudes, however, were of a very low level, and bending loads in 
the critical docking-tunnel. area were well below design limits. 


6.2 ELECTRICAL POWER 


The electrical power system performed all required functions. At 
lunar module undocking, the descent batteries had delivered 1434.7 ampere- 
hours from a nominal total capacity of 1600 ampere~hours, and the ascent 
batteries had delivered 200 ampere-hours from a nominal total of 592 
ampere-hours. The lunar module initial powered-down configuration re- 
quired an average electrical energy consumption of 900 watts at 30 am- 
peres. After the seco:ad descent propulsion firing, the lunar module was 
further powered down to about a 360-watt (12-ampere) level; as discussed 
in section 7.2. A false battery 2 malfunction and master alarm occurred 
at 99:54:00 and continued intermittently during the periods that the bat- 
tery was on (discussed in section 14.2.3). A review of the data indicates 
that a current surge of greater than 100 amperes occurred at 97:13:56 
concurrent with a crew report of a thumping noise and snowflakes seen 
through the lunar module window. This occurrence is discussed in sec- 
tion 1.2.2. 


6.3 COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT 


S-band communications were nominal from system actuation at approxi- 
mately 58 hours through lunar module wdocking. Except for brief periods 
when high-bit~-rate data and high-quality downlink voice were required, 
low power transmissions, backup voice, and omnidirectional antennas were 
used to conserve electrical power. The S-band power amplifier was turned 
off by opening the circuit breaker to provide the higher modulation index 
for telemetry. The primary communications configuration was low power, 
low-bit-rate telemetry, omnidirectional antennas, and backup voice on 
basevand. In this configuration, transmission of high~bit-rate data from 
the spacecraft was attempted using a 210-foot receiving antenna, and ex- 
cept for regular intervals of data dropout because of vehicle attitude 
changes, these data were of good quality. 


The updata link was used when required and performed nominally. No 
VHF equipment was exercised, and the S~band steerable antenna was never 
turned on. The antenna heaters, which normally remain activated, were 
turned off to conserve power, and the antenna temperature decreased to 
approximately minus 66° F. In the passive thermal control mode, this 
temperature varied between plus and minus 25° F. 


6.4 GUIDANCE, NAVIGATION AND CONTROL 


System performance, with one exception, was nominal during all phases. 
At completion of the maneuver to the attitude for the last midcourse cor- 
rection, the attitude error needles were not zeroed because of an out-of- 
sequence turn-on procedure for the digital autopilot and the inertial 
measurement unit. 


6.4.1 Attitude Control 


The performance of the abort guidance system and all attitude control 
aspects of the digital autopilot were nominal. Following the service mod- 
ule oxygen tank anomaly, power was applied to the primary guidance system 
for use in establishing passive thermal control modes and to maintain at- 
titude control until the transearth injection maneuver. 


The passive thermal control mode after transearth injection was ini- 
tiated using the digital autopilot in the manual minimum impulse mode. 
The crew had considerable difficulty in establishing acceptable initial 
conditions for the passive thermal control mode. This difficulty was 
largely caused by the necessity to use the translation hand controller 


6-3 


to command rotation about the vehicle pitch and roll axes and the atti- 
tude controller for yaw commands. The pilot's task was further compli- 
cated by having the flight director attitude indicators powered down. 
Without these displays, it was necessary to monitor attitudes by observ- 
ing gimbal angles on the display and keyboard assembly. Because the 
spacecraft yaw axis was; not coincident to that of the platform yaw axis, 
either a pitch or roll command would cause a change in both of the cor- 
responding gimbal-angle displays. After the vehicle attitude was changed 
to more closely align with the platform and to reduce the yaw gimbal- 
angle disparity, passive thermal control was established satisfactorily. 
Both guidance systems were then powered down until 105 hours. At that 
time, the abort guidance system was powered up Yor control during the 
first transearth midcourse correction. The passive thermal control mode 
was reestablished and the abort system was powered down. 


After completing the maneuver to the attitude required for the 
final midcourse correction, the crew reported that the attitude error 
needles were not nutled on the flight director attitude indicator. The 
sequence used to power up the platform and to enable the autopilot pre- 
vented certain computer memory cells from being properly initialized. 
Consequently, an avtitude error bias was introduced between the stored 
values of attitude error and those displayed on the attitude error nee- 
dles. When the digita: autopilot is turned on, a computer routine checks 
the status of an "error counter enable" bit to see if initialization is 
required. If this bit is off, as it normally would be, initialization 
takes place and the error counter, certain memory cells, and the iner- 
tial coupling display unit digital-to-analog converters are all zeroed. 
If the computer check finds the error counter enabled, the assumption 
is made that initialization has already taken place and the calculated 
attitude error iis set into the error counter for subsequent display. 


The error cowiters for the coupling display units are used by the 
digital autopilot for attitude error displays, but are also used to 
drive the platform during a coarse alignment. A platform coarse align- 
ment was performed at about 135 hours, and the error-counter-enable 
status bit was set. The digital autopilot was activated 2 hours later, 
but with the error counters already enabled, no initialization took place 
and a bias was introduced into the attitude error loop. The attitude 
errors displayed to the crew at the completion of the attitude maneuver 
prior to the seventh midcourse correction reflected a bias in the pitch, 
roli, and yaw axes of plus 1.3, plus 21.2, and minus 12.0 degrees, re- 
spectively. 


Spacecraft dynamics were very small during the service module jetti- 
son and lunar module urndocking sequence. Velocity changes imparted to 
the respective vehicles during each maneuver were as follows: 


6-4 


Platform-sensed velocity changes, ft/sec 


Command module axes Lunar module axes 


Service module separation 


Plus X translation Platform not power- 0.67 | -0.08 
Minus X translation - ed up at separation -1.90; 0.01 


Lunar module undocking -0.65 | -0.02 





6.4.2 Translation Maneuvers 


Table 6.4-I summarizes the pertinent control system parameters dur- 
ing each translation maneuver. Spacecraft dynamic response during all 
maneuvers was normal. 


The throttle profile for the first midcourse correction performed 
by the lunar module was 5 seconds at 12.7 percent followed by 27 seconds 
at 40 percent. The firing was preceded by a 10~second, four-jet ullage 
maneuver. A number of plus-X firings occurred during the maneuver be- 
cause pitch and roll thrusters were not inhibited by a Verb 65 entry, as 
required by the checklist. 


The transearth injection maneuver was performed with the primary 
guidance system controlling the descent propulsion system. The throttle 
profile was 5 seconds at 12.6 percent, 21 seconds at 40 percent, and the 
remainder at full throttle. During both periods of throttle increase, 
the roll-gimbal drive actuator traveled approximately 1.35 degrees nega- 
tively from its value at ignition. These excursion were somewhat larger 
than expected, but simulations have since shown them to be normal and 
result from engine compliance and mistrim. Spacecraft dynamics were 
nominal throughout the firing. The first transearth midcourse correction 
was the last maneuver to use the descent propulsion system. The maneuver 
was performed by manually controlling pitch and roll using the hand con- 
trollers and by automatically controlling yaw with the abort guidance 
system attitude-hold mode. The l4-second firing was accomplished at 
10-percent throttle with no adverse dynamics. 


6.4.3 Alignment 


The lunar module platform was coarse aligned to the command module 
platform a few hours after the oxygen tank incident in preparation for 


ON 
! 
uw 


TABLE 6.4-I.- LUNAR MODULE MANEUVER SUMMARY 


: 





Condition Second inidcourse Transearth Third midcourse Fourth midcourse 
correction injection correction correction 
Time 
Ignition, hr:min:sec 61:29:43.49 79:27: 38.95 195 :18:28 137:39:51.5 
Cutoff, hr:min:sec 61: 30:17.72 79: 32:02.77 105:18:he 137:40:13 
Duration, sec 3h 23 263.82 Us 
Velocity change oefore trim 
(actual/desired) 
x* +3.0/+2.9 -425..9/-426.4 7.6/7.8 
Y ~34,.2/-34.3 +644.6/+645.6 
Z ~15.9/-10.2 +378.8/+379.0 





Velocity residual after 
trim, ft/sec 
x 


N e< 








Gimbal drive actuator, in. H Not applicable Not applicable 
fnitial 
Pitch 
Roll 
Maximum excursion 
Pitch 
Roll 
Steady-state 
Pitch 
Roll 
Cutoff 
Pitch 
Roll 








Maximum rate excursion, deg/sec 
Pitch 
Roll 
Yaw 


Meximum attitude excursion, deg 
Pitch 
Roll 
Yaw 





*Earth-centered inertial coorciinates. 
*#Change in velocity shown in body X-axis for descent propulsion firings under control of abort guidance 
system. 


the midcourse correction to enter a free-return trajectory. In prepar- 
ing for the transearth injection maneuver, a check of the platform align- 
ment accuracy was completed by letting the computier point the alignment 
optical telescope at the sun as though marks were to be taken. Results 
of the sun check angles indicated a platform misalignments about any axis 
of approximately haif the allowable l~degree limit; therefore, a platform 
realignment was not required before the maneuver. 


The primary guidance system was powered up at 133-1/2 hours, after 
which a coarse alignment to the abort guidance system was performed, 
The spacecraft axes had previously been aligned to an inertial reference 
using the abort guidance system by sighting on the earth with the crew 


optical alignment sight. 


Alignment accuracy was refined by performing 


a realignment using the sun and moon as sighting targets for the align- 


ment optical telescope. 


The star-angle difference of minus 1.12 degrees 


resulted almost entirely from approximations in stored lunar and solar 
ephemeris data and computer routines used to calculate sun and moon posi- 


tion vectors. 


6.4.4 


Inertial Measurement Unit 


The inertial measurement unit performed properly throughout the mis- 


Sion. 








X - Scale factor error, ppm. . 


. 2 
Bias, cm/sec... . see 


Y = Seale factor error, ppm . 


, 2 
Bias, cm/sec ..... 





Z = Scale factor error, ppm . 






‘ 2 
Bias, cm/sec ......4-. 








Standard 
deviation 


18 
0.065 

61 
0.017 



































Null bias drift, mERU...... 





Acceleration drift, spin refer- 
ence axis, mERU/g.-. 1... s ee 








Acceleration drift, input axis, 
MERU/@* 5: ok ee ae xe eS 





Null bias drift, mERU. . 








Acceleration drift, spin refer- 
ence axis, mERU/g..... 








Acceleration drift, input axis, 
mERU/g ...... 





Null bias drift, mERU...... 








Acceleration drift, spin refer- 
ence axis, mERU/g... 





Acceleration drift, input axis, 
MERU/@ 6. we ee ee we wee 





Gyroscopes 





oa 


See 





Countdown 
value 


load 





A preflight history of the inertial components and the inflight 
accelerometer bias measurements are given in the following table. 


Plight 


Flight 
average 


+1.50 














6.4.5 


Abort guidance system performance was nominal. 
brations or compensation updates were performed. 


6-7 


Abort Guidance System Performance 


No instrument cali- 
Uncompensated accelerom- 


eter biases and gyro drifts remained within normal operating limits even 
though heater power was removed from the abort sensor assembly for most 


of the flight to conserve electrical power. 
temperature was as low as 37° F. 


At times, the sensor package 


Accelerometer bias shifts associated with the 30-day and 3-day re- 


quirements were well within specification. 


Table 6.4-II contains pre- 


flight calibration histories for the initial components of the abort 


guidance system. 


TABLE 6.4-II.- ABORT GUIDANCE SYSTEM PREINSTALUATION CALIBRATION DATA 


oo 


Accelerometer bias 






Sample 
mean, 
us 


Standard 
deviation, 





Accelerometer scale facto: 





xX 


Y 


z 


nena re 


Standard 
deviation, 
ppm 


14.90 



























eer | eta, ished 
samples iy: 3 m 
57.0 60.0 
-%.0 -31.0 
86.0 47.0 
uni? ee es Flight load, 
samples ppm 7 
rf 266 266 
-i222 ~12h9 
a5 -$22 





Gyro scale factor 











Gyro fixed drift 











Sample 
mean, 
ppa 
895 
863 
1495 
Sample 
Mean, 
deg /hr 
0.02 


-0. 30 





-0.58 
Sample 
mean 


deg/hr 


0. 86 | 


Standard 
@eviation, 
ppm 
8.7 
12.9 
9.5 
Standard 
deviation, 
deg/hr 
0.08 
0.06 
0.06 
Standard 
deviation, 


deg/hr 


0.10 








puanek Reenter : Flight load, 
samples ppm ee 

18 899 898 

18 870 870 

18 1501 1502 
ot, | bration value, | Fuge ond, 
samples deg/hr 

18 0.06 

18 -0.30 

tg ; -0.47 
ramer [Fine sats] rts toa 
samples deg/hr 

18 0.90 | 0.89 


6-8 


6.5 REACTION CONTROL 


The reaction control system was activated at about 58 hours. Total 
propellant consumption was 467 pounds. 


About 6 minutes after activation, flight data showed a sizeable de- 
crease (approximately 22 psi) in the system-A propellant manifold pres- 
sures. This decrease continued for about 4 or 5 seconds and was accom- 
panied by an increase of 7 and 8 psi in the ascent propulsion system fuel 
and oxidizer manifold pressures, respectively. These manifold pressure 
changes indicate a high flow rate from the reaction control system. This 
was verified by a decrease in the indicated quantity by about 15 pounds 
At this same time, the indicated position for the system-A ascent-feed 
interconnect valves was open. 


During passive thermal control modes, the cluster heaters were not 
used and cluster temperatures ranged from 55° to 97° F. 


6.6 DESCENT PROPULSION 


With the exception of supercritical helium system performance, de- 
scent propulsion system operation, including engine starts and throttle 
response, was normal. 


The descent propulsion system performed normally during the 34.3- 
second midcourse correction to enter a free-return trajectory. This 
Maneuver was begun at the minimum throttle position (12 percent of full 
thrust), and after 5 seconds, the throttle position was manually increased 
to approximately 37 percent, which was maintained for the remainder of the 
firing. The transearth injection maneuver lasted 264 seconds. Approxi- 
mately 15 seconds prior to engine shutdown, the pressurization isolation 
solenoid was closed to avoid a possible problem with propellant-tank 
fracture mechanics, and the maneuver was completed in the blowdown mode 
in which residual helium is the sole pressure source. The third system 
firing, a midcourse correction maneuver, was 13.7 seconds in duration 
and was performed in the blowdown mode at the minimum throttle position. 
Upon completion of this third and final descent propulsion operation, 
more than half the initial propellant load remained. 


The supercritical helium pressurization system displayed abnormal 
performance, beginning with preflight operations. Prelaunch measurements 
taken during the countdown demonstration test indicated a nominal ground 
pressure rise rate of 7.8 psi/hr. However, other special tests were per- 
formed at various conditions which gave significantly higher rise rates. 


6-9 


The average rise rate from lift-off to the first descent propulsion ma- 
neuver was 7.0 psi/hr. Between the first and second firings, the rise 
rate increased to 10.5 psi/hr, and after the second firing, the rise rate 
was 33.5 psi/hr. This anomaly is further discussed in section 14.2.1. 


At about 109 hours when the helium bottle pressure had reached ap- 
proximately 1937 psi, the burst diaphragm ruptured and relieved the super- 
critical system through a special non-propulsive vent. ‘The predicted 
rupture range for this vehicle was 1900 + 20 psia. During venting, un- 
expected motion was inparted to the spacecraft which disrupted the motion 
established for the passive thermal control mode. The vent tube for the 
supercritical helium tank is ported on two sides by diametrically opposed 
oval-shaped holes. It was originally believed that the escaping gas would 
exit these holes at 90 degrees to the tube axis such that no net thrust is 
produced. However, the pressure distribution in the tube is such that the 
two gas plumes have an included angle less than 180 degrees and probably 
closer to 90 degrees. Therefore, the component of the gas flow along the 
axis of the vent tube produces a net thrust in the opposite direction 
which tends to induce a slight roll rate to the vehicle. Since venting 
of the helium tank would be cause for aborting the mission, the unwanted 
rolling moment, which is quite small, would have no ultimate effect on a 
nominal profile. Therefore, the vent tube configuration for future space- 
craft will not be changed to one having zero net thrust. 


6.7 ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL 


Environmental control system performance was satisfactory during the 
abort phase of the mission and provided a habitable environment for the 
crew for approximately 83 hours, nearly twice the time of a nominal flight. 
Only one anomaly, reverse oxygen leakage through one of the ascent stage 
shutoff valves, occurred but did not compromise system performance. All 
crew provisions performed as intended except for cracking of a window 
shade, discussed in 14.2.5. 


An indicated total of approximately 290 pounds of water was used 
from the lunar moduie tanks between activation of the sublimator and 
undocking, and an indicated total of about 50 pounds of water remained. 
Most of the water used for drinking and food preparation was obtained 
from the command module potable water tank before 124 hours, and drink- 
ing water was subsequently used from the lunar module tanks. Average 
water usage rates varied between 2.6 and 6.3 lb/hr. 


Total oxygen usage from the three lunar module oxygen tanks was 

20.3 pounds over an 82-hour period, for an average usage rate of 0.25 lb/ 
hr. Oxygen remaining in the tanks at undocking was 33.5 pounds. During 
translunar coast, lunar module cabin leakage was about 0.014 lb/hr, assun- 
ing an average cabin pressure of 4.5 psia. Command module cabin leakage 
was estimated to have been about 0.027 lb/hr. These values indicate an 
average metabolic consumption rate throughout the flight of approximately 
Q.21 lb/hr. 


The installed primary lithium hydroxide cartridge was used for ap- 
proximately 27 hours (82 man-hours) following activation of the lunar 
module at about 58 hours. The secondary cartridge was selected at about 
85 1/2 hours. During operation of the lunar module carbon dioxide removal 
system, the level was permitted to increase to an indicated 14.9 mm Hg. 
The primary cartridge is nominally rated for a usage capacity of 41 man- 
hours at 520 Btu/man-hour. The secondary cartridge, nominally rated for 
about 17.9 man-hours, was used for 8 1/2 hours (25 1/2 man-hours). This 
cartridge is identical to that used in the portable life support system. 
A second primary cartridge was installed and used for approximately 
6 minutes, but for the remainder of the mission, command module lithium 
hydroxide cartridges were operated in a special arrangement. One side 
of each of two command module cartridges was covered and sealed with a 
plastic bag normally used to store a liquid-cooling garment. As shown 
in figure 6.7-1, one corner of the bag was sealed to the inlet of the 
suit circuit hose. The cabin atmosphere then returned to the lunar mod- 
ule suit circuit through these supplemental cartridges by way of the two 
outlet hoses. The mass flow through this arrangement was partially re- 
stricted with tape to properly load the suit-circuit compressors. After 
approximately 20 hours of operation with two command module cartridges, 
an additional wnit was stacked on each original cartridge to improve the 
carbon dioxide removal capability. With this supplemental configuration, 
when only command module cartridges were being used, the indicated carbon 
dioxide level was maintained between 0.1 and 1.8 mm Hg. The supplemental 
removal configuration using the command module iithium hydroxide cartridges 
was assembled and tested on the ground during the flight prior to its 
actual use in the spacecraft. 


Low cabin temperature, resulting from a greatly reduced thermal load- 
ing from powered down electrical equipment, was uncomfortable to the crew 
during the return flight. For most of this time, power levels were main- 
tained between 350 and 400 watts. Environmental equipment operation, 
however, was normal for this thermal loading, with temperatures of the 
water/glycol coolant at the sublimator inlet of approximately 46° F. 

Cabin temperatures were typically between 54° and 60° F, and suit inlet 
temperatures were maintained between 40° and 41° F during this portion 
of the flight. 


6-11 


The only anomaly observed in the environmental control system was 
a reverse leakage from the oxygen manifold through the shutoff valve into 
the ascent oxygen tank 2. Following the use of oxygen from the tank on 
two occasions, tank pressure was permitted to increase to the regulated 
manifold pressure, where it remained for the duration of the flight. 
The maximum leakage rate through the valve was approximately 0.22 lb/hr. 
Both the specification leakage rate and the preflight test leakage rate 
were 0.001 lb/hr. The leaking valve would have presented a problem if 
this ascent oxygen tank had developed an external leak. Further informa-~ 
tion regarding this anomaly is contained in section 14.2.4. 


NASA-S-70-5826 





Pe Lunar 
module 
a cabin 





Normal lithium 
hydroxide 
installation 










Suit air 
fans 
Water module cabin Command male 
separator A lithium hydroxide 
Lv : cartridges 
Suit 
Plastic bag Suit 
for stowing Hose 
liquid 
cooling 
garment —~ 
toth 
tape 
Tape a Cardboard arch to 


prevent bag collapse 


~——-Command module 
lithium hydroxide 
taped together 


(a) Configuration schematic. 


Figure 6.7-1.-- Supplemental carbon dioxide removal system. 


6-12 


NASA-S-70-5827 






Command module: 
lithium hydroxide 
cartvidge~ 


b). Inflight photograph. 


Figure 6.7-1.- Supplemental carbon dioxide removal system. 


In using the lunar module water gun to dampen a towel, a piece of 
towel material most likely became caught in the gun nozzle when the actu- 
ating trigger was released, resulting in water leakage from the nozzle. 
The lunar module water gun was returned to earth and during postflight 
testing was found to be operating properly. Postflight testing also 
showed that reactuation of the valve can flush any towel material from 
the gun. The command module water gun was satisfactorily used for the 
remainder of the mission. 


7.0 MISSION CONSUMABLES 


Consumables from the command and service modules were used normally 
during the 56 hours prior to the incident, at a modified usage schedule 
for 2 hours after the incident, and after command module activation just 
prior to entry. The limar module usages occurred in the period following 
power-up until the two spacecraft were undocked. 


7-1 COMMAND AND SERVICE MODULES 


Consumable usages for the command and service modules prior to the 
incident were nominal. Following the incident and the attendant shut- 
down of command module power, the only consumables used prior to entry 
were drinking water and surge-tank oxygen, required to pressurize the 
potable water tank. Specific consumable usages for appropriate systems 
are presented in the following paragraphs. 


7.1.1 Service Propulsion Propellants 
The service propulsion system was used only for the first midcourse 


correction. The propellant loadings listed in the following table were 
calculated from gaging system readings and measured densities prior to 


lift-off. 
Fuel, 1b Oxidizer, lb 
Loaded 


In tanks 15 606 
In lines 79 


Total 15 685 ho 769 


Consume d 92.3 = 239.3 


Remaining at 
of incident 15 592.7 4O 529.7 





7.1.2 Reaction Control Propellants 


Service module.~ At the time the system was powered down, reaction 
control system propellant usage was 108 pounds higher than predicted. 
The higher usage is attributed to the increased thruster activity requir- 
ed to null the effects of propulsive venting from both oxygen tanks dur- 
ing the incident. The usages listed in the following table were calcu- 
lated from telemetered helium tank pressure data using the relationship 
between pressure, volume, and temperature. 


Loaded 
Quad A 336 .0 
Quad B 335.0 
Quad C 335.5 
Quad D 336.3 


1342.8 
Consumed 286* 


Remaining at time 
of system shutdown 1056.8 





*Preflight planned usage was 178 pounds. 


Command module.- Command module reaction control system propellant 
usages cannot be accurately assessed, since telemetry data were not avail- 
able during entry. Until the time of communications blackout, approxi- 
mately 12 pounds of propellant had been used. For a normal entry, this 
value would be considered high; however, the system was activated longer 
than normal and was used during separation from the lunar module. 


Loaded quantities, lb 


System 1 System 2 


Fuel 
Oxidizer 


Totals 








{=3 


7.1.3 Cryogenic Fluids 


Cryogenic oxygen and hydrogen usages were nominal until the time 
of the incident. The pressure decay in oxygen tank 2 was essentially 
instantaneous, while oxygen tank 1 was not depleted until approximately 
2 hours following the incident. Usages listed in the following table 
are based on an analysis of the electrical power produced by the fuel 
cells. 


Available at lift-off 
Tank 1 
Tank 2 


Totals 
Consumed 


Tank 1 
Tank 2 


Totals 


Remaining at the time 
of the incident 

Tank 1 

Tank 2 


Totals 





7.1.4 Oxygen 


Following the incident and loss of pressure in tank 1, the total 
oxygen supply consisted of 3.77 pounds in the surge tank and 1 pound in 
each of the three repressurization bottles. About 0.6 pound of the oxy- 
gen from the surge tank was used during potable water tank pressuriza- 
tions and to activate the oxygen system prior to entry. An additional 
0.3 pound was used for breathing during entry. 


7.1.5 Water 


At the time of the incident, about 38 pounds of water was available 
in the potable water tank. During the abort phase, the crew used juice 
bags to transfer approximately 14 pounds of water from the command module 
to the lunar module for drinking and food preparation. 


7-4 


7.1.6 Batteries 


The command module was completely powered down at 58 hours 0 minutes, 
at which time 99 ampere-hours remained in the three entry batteries. By 
charging the batteries with lunar module power, available battery capacity 
was increased to 118 ampere~hours. Figure 7.1~1 depicts the battery energy 
available and used during entry. At landing, 29 ampere-hours of energy 
remained. 


NASA-S-70-5828 
140 





120 





80 











60 





Energy capacity, ampere-hours 


40 











20 








Time, hr 


i Figure 7.1-l1.- Entry battery energy. 


7.2 LUNAR MODULE 


Following lunar module power-up, oxygen, water, and battery power 
were consumed at the lowest practical rate to increase the duration of 


(3 


spacecraft support from a nominal 44 hours to a required 83 hours plus 
margins. In addition, the descent propulsion and reaction control sys- 
tems were used to effect all required translation and attitude maneuvers 


following the incident. 
7.2.1 Descent Propulsion Propellants 
The loaded quantities of descent propulsion system propellants shown 


in the following table were calculated from quantity readings in the 
spacecraft and measured densities prior to lift-off. 


Fuel, 1b Oxidizer, lb 


Loaded 11 350.9 18 434.5 


Consumed 5 07.4 8 342.9 





Remaining at undocking 6 233.5 10 091.6 





7.2.2 Reaction Control Propellants 


The reaction control system propellant consumption, shown in the 
following table, was calculated from telemetered helium tank data using 
the relationship between pressure, volume, and temperature. 


Loaded 
System A 107.7 
‘System B 


Total 












208.8 
208.8 









Consumed 
System A 
System B 


Total 


Remaining at undocking 
System A 
System B 


Total 





1-6 


7.2.3 Oxygen 


Actual oxygen usage closely followed predicted rates from the time 
of lunar module power-up wntil undocking, at which time approximately 
32 pounds of oxygen remained. The values in the following table are 
based on telemetered data. 


Remaining after 


Descent stage 


Ascent stage 
Tank 1 
Tank 2 


Total 





“The shutoff valve in ascent stage tank 2 had reverse leakage (dis- 
cussed in section 14.2.4). 


7.2.4 Water 


During the abort phase, lunar module water, which is used primarily 
to cool the cabin and onboard equipment, was the most restrictive consum- 
able. As a result, extreme measures were taken to shut down all nones- 
sential equipment in order to provide the maximum margin possible. At 
launch, the total loaded water available for inflight use was 338 pounds. 
At the time of undocking, approximately 50 pounds of water remained and, 
at the reduced power condition, would have provided an additional 18 hours 
of cooling. The actual water usage from the time of initial power-up to 
undocking:‘is shown in figure 7.2-l. 


7.2.5 Batteries 


At the time of power up, 2179 ampere-hours of electrical energy was 
available from the four descent- and two ascent-stage batteries. As in- 
dicated in figure 7.2-2, initial consumption was at a current of 30 amperes 
until the second descent propulsion system firing, after which the vehicle 
was powered down to a l2-ampere load. At approximately 112 hours, power 
was provided to charge the command module entry batteries at a rate of 
about 7 amperes for approximately 15 hours. The command module was also 
powered from the lunar module at an ll-ampere rate for a brief period to 


i ald 


operate the reaction control heaters and telemetry equipment. The esti- 
mated total energy transferred to the command module was approximately 


129 ampere hours. A total of 410 ampere hours remained in the lunar mod- 
ule batteries at tthe time of undocking. 


NASA-S-70-5829 
280 











T T 
Lunar a 











240 | NN 


System _ 
activation 
200 | \ 


Tunnel vent complete] 
N! 


40 








HHL 
ce 











Ascent water, |b 




















0 
120 130 140 150 
Time, hr 


| 

| 

| 

: Z 
: t a ! 3 

: cidade Ir 

40 |i 

| 

| 








Descent water, Ib 





| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

















Undocking 


BRE Seel i 
EER 


50 60 70 80 90 10 130 140 150 





























110 120 


Time, br 


Figure 7.2-1.- Lunar module water usage. 


Energy remaining, amp-hr 


NASA-S -70-5830 


2400 


2200 


2000 


1800 


1600 


1200 


1000 


800 





area 


| | System activation 








EEE 


\_ | 









































T 
\ Undocking 
is 


: 
V1 





















































Time, hr 


Figure 7.2-2.- Lunar module total battery capacity during flight. 





Apollo 13 flight crew 


Commander James A. Lovell, Jr., Command Module Pilot John L. Swigert, Jr., and Lunar Module Pilot Fred W. Haise, Jr. 


8.0 PILOTS' REPORT 
8.1 TRAINING 


Crew training for Apollo 13 commenced on August 1, 1969. The crew 
was based in Houston until December 1, 1969, when operations were trans- 
ferred to the launch site for final training. ‘The training time was ade- 
quate to meet the planned launch date of April LL, 1970, and all training 
objectives were met. ‘The only difficulty in coordinating the training 
activities was the :scheduling of the lunar landing training vehicle for 
the Commander. The late availability of this vehicle, the large amount 
of time required for this type of training, and the need to travel be- 
tween Houston and Cape Kennedy complicated the training schedule signif- 
icantly. Because a primary objective was a field geology experiment as 
part of the second extravehicular excursion, considerable emphasis was 
placed on geology training. A week-long geology field trip to train the 
crew as "observers" was completed early in the training cycle. Later 
field trips emphasized practical geological procedures and timelines. 
Extensive use of field radios, extravehicular equipment, and assistance 
from mission control during these field trips made the training more 
effective. 


Several days prior to launch, the backup Lunar Module Pilot became 
sick with measles. Examinations of the prime crew indicated that the 
Command Module Pilot was not immune to the disease; therefore, the backup 
Command Module Pilot was substituted. The last 2 days prior to flight 
were devoted to integrated training among the three crew members , includ- 
ing the new Command Module Pilot. Flight results indicate that the last 
minute change of Command Module Pilots was practical and presented no 
training deficiencies, including readiness for the abort condition that 
occurred. 


8.2 PRELAUNCH PREPARATION 


The prelaunch timeline was satisfactory, and adequate time was 
allotted for suiting and associated activities to meet the ingress time. 
The final count was smooth and communications with the Test Conductor and 
the Mission Control Center were adequate. After the fuel cell selector 
knob was rotated and had been in the new position for a short time, the 
fuel cell flow indicators would alternately rise several scale marks and 
then return to normal momentarily before cycling again. Since this ef- 
fect was observed for all three fuel cells, the possibility of a sensor 
anomaly was dismissed. With the crew fully strapped down, some difficulty 
was encountered in removing the helmet protective covers just prior to 
egress of the closeout personnel. 


8-2 


8.3 LAUNCH 


Ignition and lift-off occurred on schedule. A listing of major 
flight plan events as they occurred is contained in figure 8-1. First- 
stage performance was nominal and coincided very closely with simulations. 
Communications during the high noise level phase of flight were excellent. 
Staging of the S-IC occurred nearly on time and was accompanied by three 
distinct longitudinal oscillations. S-II ignition and thrusting was 
smooth until about 00:05:32, when a sudden buildup in vibration was felt, 
followed by illumination of the number 5 engine out light. The Mission 
Control Center confirmed that engine 5 had shut down approximately 2 min- 
utes early. S-II performance after that time was smooth with no notice- 
able abnormalities. S-II staging and S-IVB ignition occurred late, at 
9 minutes 57 seconds. S-IVB performance was nominal but seemed to be 
accompanied by more vibration than was noted during Apollo 8. [The 
Apollo 13 Commander had been the Command Module Pilot for Apollo 8]. All 
three crewmen noted the small change in acceleration caused by the mixture 
ratio shifts during S-II and S-IVB flight. S-IVB engine cutoff occurred 
at 00:12:30, with the spacecraft guidance system registering the follow- 
ing insertion parameters: velocity 25 565 ft/sec, apogee 102.6 miles, 
and perigee 100.1 miles. 


8.4 EARTH ORBIT 


The insertion checklist was completed and disclosed no systems 
abnormalities. The optics dust covers did not jettison when the shaft 
was driven 90 degrees (checklist was in error). However, the star align- 
ment program was selected in the computer and the dust covers jettisoned 
when the optics were being driven to the first star; a shift of approxi- 
mately 150 degrees. The objective of television in earth orbit was to 
show the Gulf Coast line, but this objective could not be achieved because 
of cloud cover. Television preparation was very easily handled within 
the nominal timeline. 


8.5 TRANSLUNAR INJECTION 


Nominal first-opportunity translunar injection procedures were used 
and are satisfactory. Based on S-IVB orbit attitude hold, the ground 
controllers updated the spacecraft attitude indicators from 18 to 20 de- 
grees. This update was satisfactory and resulted in an essentially zero 
theta angle in the orbital rate display during the S-IVB translunar in- 
jection. S-IVB vibration was greater during translunar injection than 
that experienced during Apollo 8. These vibrations had high-frequency, 


NASA-S -70-5831 


Time, hr Time, hr 
0 Lift-off 5 


Insertion and systems check 


Platform alignment 


€xtend docking probe 
Television 


Prepare for trans lunar injection 


Translunar syection 


Command and service module/S-IVB 
separation 
Begin television transmis:3ion 


Docking 


Configure for spacecraft/ S-YYB separation 


4 Spacecrafi/ S-IWB separation 9 


S-IYB separation maneuver 


Initiate battery B charge 
End tesevision transmissior 


Doff and stow pressure garment assembiies 


5 10 


Time. hr 
10 
Platform realigned 
tl 
Optics calibration 
Cis lunar navigation 
Fuel cell oxygen purge 
Begin eat perrod 12 
Initiate earth weather photography 
Initiate passive thermal control 
End eat period 13 
Reinitiate passive thermal contrai 
Lithium hydroxide canister chance 
23 


26 


(a) 0 to 28 hours. 


Figure 8-1.- Flight plan activities. 


8-3 


Platform reatiuyjunent 


Terminate earth weather photaqraphy 


Bega eat period 


End eat period 
Begin sleep period 


End sleep period 
Begin eat period 


Lithiain hydeoxide canister change 
Initiate battery A charge 


Platform realignment 


Eng eat period 


NASA-S -70-5832 


Time, hr 

28 Begin eat period 

29 End et period 
Ptatfonn reatigquient 
Termite passive thermal control 
Waste water duiup 

30 
Beam television transnussien 
Fuel celt hydrogen cud oxygen purges 
Midcourse correction 

31 End television transmission 
Cislunar navigation 
Optics cairbeation 
Photography of Comet Bennett 

32 Initiate passive thermal contro! 

33 


Time, hr 


Waste water dump 


Reinieale passive thermat contro! 


Lithnun hydroxide casrster change 


Begin et period 


End eat period 
Begin steep period 


33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
46 
End steep jreriod 
a7 Begin eat period 
Lithunn hydroxide camster change 
48 End eat period 
49 Piatforns realuprnent 
52 Begin eat period 
Ititeate battery B charge 
53 


End eat period 


(vb) 28 to 69 hours. 


Figure 8-1.- Continued 


Time, hr 
53 


54 


55 


56 


57 


58 


61 


62 


63 


68 


69 


Fuct cell oxyqen purde 

Waste water dump 

Clear anid daspect dutnet ut yee petite 
for transfer to linae mudite 


Lunar Module Pilot rausices to 
fund madtule 

Conunaucler wewisfer 10 Ive wettate 

Lina inadule checkout 


Bey tofevision transonssiue 


Lunar Module Pilot and Comusoter 
Inaisier lo command amodule 


Close: tunnel hated 
Cryoguun. oxygen tank wicident 
Stuatdown fuel cetls 1 aad 3 


Emergency powcr down 


Commander and Lausar Module Plot 
trausler to furar module 

Lima module guidance system 

Shutdown fed cell 2 


Power-iown comand nodule computer 
acl platform 


Power-down counmaud module systens 


Descent propulsion systens naneuver 


Power-down tinar modute 
Lunar Module Pilot sieep 


Commander and Command Modute Pilot 
eat : 


End Couwnander and Command Module 
Pitot eat period 
Lunar Module Pilot wakeup 


NASA-S -70-5833 





(c) 69 to 122 hours. 


Figure 8-1.-— Continued. 


Time, hr Sime, hr Time, hr 
69 Lunvw Modute Pilot eat 87 Lunar Module Pilot sleep 102 [ Bequi cal perio 
i 
Comtsind Module Pilot wakeup 
70 Cownssicler and Command Module Pilot sleep 90 Conan Module Pslot eat 103. Ent eat period 
Commander and Command Module Pilat wake 
76 Commander and Command Module Pitot eat 91 End eat period 104 
Commander eat 
Power-up limar modute syste nes 
77 End eat period 92 105 
End cat period Midcuurse correctiun 
Commander sleep Mitiue passive Uemaa Comrol 
7 Lunar Module Pilot wakeup Powcr-dowas lamas m@lile sysicis 
78 Power-un lunar module systems 95 Cominanit Module Pilot and Lunar Module 106 Cosstnand Module Pilot wit Lair Mo be 
Algo abort guidance system to prunary Prlot eat Pilot sicep 
guidance system 
‘ Conant Module Pilot ant Lenac Mogsle 
79 96 Eng eat penod li2 Pilot wakeup 
Transfer lunar nodule power to Conan. 
Ah Serwice nOuute 
Trasearth wmjecton Jiinteate charge battery A 
Lelltisies dydroxule Coumster Ur aes 
80 98 113 Conmander sleep 
Contnanler wakes 
Conunander eat 
81 Begin eat period 99 114 
End eat period 
82 End eat period 100 Configure lun module for nudcourse 115 
Power-down lunar module systems correction 
Commander and Coimand Module Pilot sleep fo 
:, ~ Commander wakeup 
Commander wakeup 
86 Commander and Lunar Module Pitot eat 1Ol, 1l6 Command Module Pitot sleev 
Establsts command and service module 
power Configuration tor telemetry 
87 End eal period 102 Power=1) command and service nodules 122] 


NASA-S-70-5834 


Time, hr Time, hr 
122 136 


Command Module Pilot wakeup 
Commander sleep 


123 . 137 


124 138 


Commander wakeup 
Command Module Pilot sleep 


125 : 139 


Command Module Pilot wakeup 

126 Lunar Module Pitot sleep 140 
Terininate charge battery A 
Initiate charge battery B 


127 441 


128 Lunar Module Pilot wakeup 142 


Terminate charge battery B 


Begin sieep period 


129 143 


133 End steep period 


Power-up lunar module systems 


134 


Platform alignment 


135 


(a) 122 to 143 hours. 


Figure 8-1.- Concluded. 


Prepare for midcourse correction 


Midcourse correction 


Service module separation 


Photography of service module 


Power-1) Command module 


Platforw aidumeat 
Lunar modute maneuver Lo nndocking attitude 


Lunar nodule undockiay 


Entry mterface 
Lancing 


8-7 


low-magnitude characteristics but presented no problems for monitoring 
of the injection maneuver. At cutoff, the computer-displayed inertial 
velocity was 35 560 ft/sec, and the entry monitor system accelerometer 
confirmed the maneuver to be within 3 ft/sec of the desired value. 


8.6 “TRANSPOSITION AND DOCKING 


Following separation and translation, a manual pitch maneuver of 
1.5 deg/sec was executed. Computer control was reselected, and a trans- 
lation was initiated to give a small closing velocity. A digital auto- 
pilot maneuver was executed to align the respect:ive roll attitudes. 
Maximum spacecraft separation was approximately 80 feet. At the final 
attitude, the image in the crewman optical alignment sight was almost 
completely washed out by the sun reflection from the lunar module until 
the vehicles were separated by 6 feet or less. Contact was made at ap- 
proximately 0.2 ft/sec with a slight roll misalignment. Subsequent tun- 
nel inspection revealed a roll index angle of minus 2.0 degrees. The 
handles on latches 1 and 4 were not locked and were recocked and released 
manually. Spacecraft ejection was normal. Total reaction control fuel 
used for transposition, docking, and extraction was reported as 55 pounds. 


8.7 TRANSLUNAR FLIGHT 


8.7.1 Coast Phase Activities 


Following translunar injection, earth weather photography was con- 
ducted for approximately 6 hours. 


The first period of translunar navigation (Program 23) at 6 hours 
was done to establish the apparent horizon attitude for optical marks 
in the computer. Some manual maneuvering was required to achieve a 
parallel reticle pattern at the point of horizon-star superposition. 
The second period of navigation measurements was less difficult, and 
both periods were accomplished within the timeline and reaction control 
fuel budget. 


The passive thermal control mode was initiated with the digital 
autopilot. A roll rate of 0.3 deg/sec was used with the positive longi- 
tudinal spacecraft axis pointed toward ecliptic north pole. An incorrect 
entry procedure was used on one attempt and reinitialization of passive 
thermal control was required. After proper initialization, all thrusters 
were disabled and the spacecraft maintained an attitude for thermal pro- 
tection for long periods without approaching gimbal lock. Platform 


8-8 


alignments (Program 52) with passive thermal control mode rates of 
0.3 deg/sec were satisfactory in the optics resolve mode at medium speed. 


At about 47 hours the oxygen tank 2 quantity sensor failed full 
scale high, a condition which was confirmed by the ground. 


8.7.2 First Midcourse Correction 


The first midcourse correction maneuver, performed at the second 
option point, was completely nominal. The service propulsion engine was 
started and stopped on time, and residuals were negligible. In conjunc- 
tion with this service propulsion maneuver, some differences were noted 
with respect to the command module simulator. When gimbal motors were 
turned on, an 8- to 10~ampere increase was noted, with a slightly faster 
jump than had been seen in the simulator. The major distinction was the 
fact that fuel cell flowrate indications are barely seen to move, whereas 
there is a very noticeable change in the simulator. At engine ignition, 
the ball valve indicators moved slowly to open, but in the simulator, 
they instantaneously move to open. After turning off the battery bus 
ties, the battery voltage slowly rose from 32 volts to the open circuit 
voltage of about 37 volts, whereas in the simulator there is an instantan- 
eous recovery. 


The television presentation during the midcourse correction maneuver, 
as well as during transposition and docking, interfered with normal oper- 
ational functions to a degree not seen in training. The lunar module 
pilot was forced to spend full time adjusting, pointing, and narrating 
the television broadcast. A suggested altermative for telecasting during 
dynamic events is to have the ground do all commentary. Crew-designated 
television can be conveniently performed during a lull period when full 
attention can be given to presentation requirements. 


8.7.3 Cryogenic Oxygen Tank Incident 


At approximately 55 hours 54 minutes, a loud noise was heard when 
the Command Module Pilot was in the left seat, the Commander in the lower 
equipment bay, and the Lunar Module Pilot in the tunnel. The noise was 
comparable to that noted in exercising the lunar module repressurization 
valve. The Command Module Pilot and Lunar Module Pilot also reported a 
minor vibration or tremor in the spacecraft. 


Approximately 2 seconds later, the Command Module Pilot reported a 
master alarm and a main-bus-B undervoltage light. Voltage readouts from 
main bus B, fuel cell 3 current, and reactant flows were normal, and it 
was concluded a transient had occurred. The Command Module Pilot then 
initiated efforts to install the tunnel hatch. 


8-9 


The Lunar Module Pilot proceeded to the right seat and found the 
ac=bus=-2 and ac-bus—2-overload warning lights on, with main bus B volt- 
age, fuel-cell-3 current, and fuel-cell-3 reactant flow indications off- 
scale low. Inverter 2 was then removed from main bus B. 


On switching ac electrical loads to ac bus 1, the main bus A under- 
voltage light illuminated, with a corresponding reading of 25.5 volts. 
A check of the fuel cells revealed fel cell 1 reactant flow to be zero. 
At all times, fuel cells 1 and 2 were tied to main bus A and fuel cell 3 
to main bus B, with the proper grey flags displayed. 


Efforts to install the tunnel hatch were terminated when the Com- 
mander observed venting of material from the service module area. He 
then reported the oxygen tank 2 pressure was zero and oxygen tank 1 pres- 
sure was decreasing. This information pinpointed the problem source to 
within the command and service modules. 


At ground request, fuel cells 1 and 3 regulator pressures were read 
from the systems test meter, confirming the loss of these fuel cells. 
AC bus 2 was tied to inverter 1, and the emergency power-down procedure 
was initiated to reduce the current flow to 10 amperes. At ground re- 
quest, fuel cell 1 and, shortly thereafter, fuel cell 3 were shutdown in 
an attempt to stop the decrease in oxygen tank 1 pressure. 


Lunar module powerup was handled quite efficiently by identifying 
selected segments of an existing procedure, the "Lunar Module Systems 
Activation Checklist." However, the crew had to delete the very high 
frequency portion of the communications activation. This procedure also 
assumed suited operations, so the crew had to turn on suit flow valves 
and unstow hoses to establish air flow. This extended power-up blended 
well with the preparation for the subsequent midcourse maneuver to enter 
a free return trajectory. A similar real-time update to the 2-hour acti- 
vation section of the "Lunar Module Contingency Checklist" was also quite 
adequate. Lunar module activation was completed at the time fuel cell 2 
reactant flow went to zero because of oxygen depletion. The command and 
service modules were then powered down completely according to a ground- 
generated procedure. To form a starting baseline for subsequent proce- 
dures, each switch and circuit breaker in the command module was posi- 
tioned according to ground instructions. 


Potable water was obtained by periodically pressurizing the potable 
tank with surge-tank oxygen and withdrawing potable water until the pres- 
sures equalized. This method provided potable water for crew use until 
24 hours prior to entry, at which time water could not be withdrawn from 
the potable tank and it appeared to be exhausted [section 5.8]. 


8-10 


The hatch, probe, and drogue were secured in the couches by lap belt 
and shoulder harness restraints to prevent movement during subsequent 
maneuvers. , 


8.7.4 Midcourse Correction to a Free Retum 


A descent propulsion system maneuver to reestablish a free-return 
trajectory was planned for 61-1/2 hours using primary guidance. The 
docked configuration was maneuvered manually to null out guidance system 
error needles using the thrust/translation controller assembly for roll 
and pitch control and the attitude controller assembly for yaw control. 
It was not difficult to control the docked configuration in this manner. 
There was, however, some concern as to the effect the use of the thrust/ 
translation controller assembly would have on the trajectory. After the 
error needles were nulled, attitude was maintained using primary guidance 
with attitude control in "Auto." 


Primary guidance system performance was nominal during the midcourse 
maneuver to a free return. There were no vehicle attitude excursions, 
and the firing time was as predicted. The abort guidance system was not 
powered up for this maneuver. 


After the free-returm midcourse correction, the spacecraft was ma- 
neuvered manually to the passive thermal control mode attitudes. The 
passive thermal control mode techniques consisted of maneuvering in the 
pulse mode 90 degrees in yaw once each hour using the pulse mode. To 
conserve power, the attitude indicators were turned off after the initial 
passive thermal control mode was started, and attitude monitoring was ac- 
complished by observing gimbal angle readouts from the display keyboard. 


To conserve reaction control fuel when holding an attitude, a wide 
deadband was established using primary guidance. Because the platform 
was not aligned with a passive thermal control mode reference matrix, 
yawing the vehicle each hour resulted in inner and middle gimbal angle 
deviations. The crew could not determine any standard procedure to keep 
the middle angle constant during the maneuver. As the spacecraft maneu- 
vered from one quadrant to the next, the same thrust/translation control- 
ler assembly input would result in a different effect in controlling the 
middle gimbal angle. 


8.7.5 Platform Alignment 
To assure the alignment accuracy of the lunar module platform for 


the transearth injection maneuver, a check was made at 74 hours utilizing 
the sun for reference. The method involved a platform alignment program 


8-11 


(P52, option 3), loading the sun vectors, and utilizing an automatic atti- 
tude maneuver. The null point was approximately one-half a sun diameter 
to the right of the sun's edge. A two-diameter offset was allowable, so 
the platform was considered acceptable. 


Initial outside observations through the lunar module windows indi- 
cated that normal. platform alignments using a star reference would be ex- 
tremely difficult because of the large amount of debris in the vicinity 
of the spacecraft. This debris apparently originated during the tank 
incident. A subSequent observation when the spacecraft was in the moon's 
shadow indicated that an alignment at that time would have been feasible 
because of the improved visual contrast. Crew training for sun/earth and 
sun/moon alignments in the simulators should be emphasized to handle con- 
tingencies such as occurred during Apollo 13. 


8.8 TRANSEARTH INJECTION 


Maneuvering to the proper attitude for transearth injection was done 
manually with the thrust/translation controller assembly and attitude 
controller assembly while tracking primary guidance error needles. The 
error needles were nulled, and the spacecraft was then placed in the pri- 
mary guidance automatic control mode to maintain attitude. 


Guidance system performance was again nominal and there were no sig- 
nificant attitude excursions. The throttle profile was started in the 
idle position, then moved to 40 percent for 21 seconds, and finally to 
full throttle for the remainder of the firing. The maneuver residuals 
were 0.2, 0.0, and 0.3 ft/sec in the X, Y, and Z axes, respectively. The 
abort guidance system was powered up and was used to monitor both attitude 
and velocity change and agreed with primary system readouts throughout the 
maneuver. 


8.9 TRANSEARTH COAST 


8.9.1 Coast Phase Activities 


To establish a passive thermal control mode during initial transearth 
coast, the spacecraft was manually maneuvered to the initial attitude by 
nulling out the attitude error needles. In this position, spacecraft . 
rates were monitored by the ground. When rates were sufficiently damped, 
21 yaw-right pulse inputs were made to establish a vehicle rolling motion. 
The resulting maneuver placed the apparent moon and earth motion horizon- 
tal with respect to the lunar module windows. 


8-12 


After the passive thermal control mode was established, the lunar 
module was powered down according to the contingency checklist for an 
emergency power-down. Minor modifications were made to this procedure 
to account for passive thermal control mode operation. The spacecraft 
functions remaining were low-bit-rate telemetry , S-band tracking and 
voice, caution and warning sensing, cabin repressurization capability, 
and the operation of the glycol pumps and suit fans. 


A series of master alarms and battery caution lights was noted and 
isolated to descent-stage battery 2. In view of the equal distribution 
of the 12 amperes being supplied by all batteries in the powered down 
mode, reverse current was ruled out, and because of the low current load, 
overtemperature was also ruled out. Therefore, the problem was attributed 
to a sensor (discussed in section 14.2.3). To prevent recurring alarms , 
the master alarm circuit breaker was opened. 


After the first descent propulsion maneuver, the ground provided a 
work/rest schedule which kept either the Commander or the Lunar Module 
Pilot on watch at all times. This schedule was followed at first with 
the command module being utilized as a sleeping area. However, after 
lunar module power-down, the command module cabin temperature decreased 
to the point that it was unacceptable for use as a rest station. There- 
after, all three crew members remained in the lunar module and any sleep 
was in the form of short naps. The lunar module also cooled down to an 
extent where sleep was not possible for approximately the last 16 hours. 


The potable water available was used solely for drinking and re- 
hydrating juices. No water was expended in rehydratable foods, since 
there was an ample supply of both prepared wetpacks and nonrehydratable 
foods (breads, brownies, food cubes, etc.). 


It became apparent that there were insufficient lithium hydroxide 
cartridges in the lunar module to support the abort mission, even with 
allowable carbon dioxide levels extended to a partial pressure of 15 mm 
Hg. With ground instructions, a system was constructed which attached 
a command module lithium hydroxide cartridge to each of two lunar module 
suit hoses. The Commander's remaining hose was placed in the tunnel area 
to provide fresh oxygen to the command module, while the Lunar Module 
Pilot's remaining hose was positioned in the lunar module environmental 
control area. At a later time, a second cartridge was added in series 
to the cartridges initially installed, as shown in figure 6.7-l. In each 
case, the drop in carbon dioxide levels reported by the ground showed 
satisfactory operation of this improvised carbon dioxide removal system. 


Earlier, at approximately 73 hours, the command module windows had 
become nearly opaque with water droplets. This moisture contamination 
continued to increase, and at approximately 110 hours a thin wafer film 
appeared on the interior command module structure itself, as well as on 


8-13 


the lunar module windows. Despite this condensation because of the re- 
duced cabin temperature, at no time did the humidity reach levels which 
were uncomfortable to the crew. The moisture on the luwmar module windows 
disappeared shortly after power-up at approximately 135 hours. The con- 
densation generally disappeared after parachute deployment, although the 
structure remained cold even after landing. 


After the command module auxiliary urine dump, used through the side 
hatch, was exercised, the crew was requested by the ground to inhibit all 
further overboard dumps so as not to interfere with navigation sightings. 
This single dump was noted to seriously degrade visibility through the 
command module hatch window. Since this restriction was never retracted, 
all subsequent urine collections were stowed onboard. The containers 
utilized for urine collections were the six lunar module urine transfer 
bags, three command module backup waste bags, the condensate container, 
two water collection bags for the portable life support system, and three 
urine collection devices. The command module waste stowage compartment 
appeared to be full with only seven fecal bags stowed in this area. Add- 
ing to the waste stowage problem was the stiffness of the outer fecal 
bags. 


At approximately 105 hours, the crew performed a manual descent 
propulsion maneuver to improve the entry angle. Since the primary guid- 
ance and navigation system was powered down, alignment was accomplished 
manually. The spacecraft was maneuvered to place the cusps of the earth's 
terminator on the Y-axis reticle of the crewmen optical alignment sight. 
The illuminated portion of the earth was then placed at the top of the 
reticle. This procedure positimed the lunar module X-axis perpendicular 
to the earth's terminator and permitted a retrograde maneuver to be per- 
formed perpendicular to the flight path to steepen the entry angle. The 
proper pitch attitude was maintained by positioing the sun in the top 
center portion of the telescope. With the spacecraft in the proper atti- 
tude, a body-axis alignment using the abort guidance system was followed 
immediately by entry into an attitude hold mode. This sequence resulted 
in attitude indications of zero for all axes and permitted use of the at- 
titude error needles to maintain attitude. Attitude control during the 
maneuver was performed by manually nulling the pitch and roll error nee- 
dies. This maneuver necessarily required crew-cooperation, since the 
Lunar Module Pilot controlled pitch and the Commander controlled roll. 
Yaw attitude was maintained automatically by the abort guidance system. 
The Command Module Pilot called out the engine start and stop times, and 
the entire 14~-second firing was performed at 10 percent thrust. The en- 
gine was shut down 1 second short of the calculated firing time to pre- 
clude an overburn which might require use of minus-X thrusters and cause 
plume impingement on the command module. The control and alignment tech- 
niques to accomplish such a contingency midcourse maneuver are believed 
to be satisfactory. 


8-14 


The passive thermal control mode was reestablished by rolling 90 de- 
grees with reference to the abort-guidance-driven attitude displays. This 
maneuver placed the terminator parallel to the X-axis of the crewmen opti- 
cal alignment sight. Rates were nulled in pitch and roll with the thrust/ 
translation controller assembly. Yaw was again automatically controlled 
by the abort guidance system. Nulling rates to zero was impossible be- 
cause of the inaccurate readout of the rate needles. When rates appeared 
to be nulled, yaw control was placed in the reaction control pulse mode. 
Twelve yaw-right pulses were then used to start the passive thermal con- 
trol mode maneuver. Because rates could not be completely nulled, some 
roll-pitch coupling was observed. 


At approximately 109 hours, the burst disk in the supercritical 
helium tank ruptured, as expected. The venting caused an unexpected re- 
versal in the lunar module yaw rate [command module roll] during passive 
thermal control at about twice the initial value and also introduced some 
pitch motion. No attempt was made, however, to reestablish manually a 
stable passive thermal control mode. 


8.9.2 Entry Preparation 


The unprecedented powered-down state of the command module required 
generation of several new procedures in preparation for entry. The com- 
mand module was briefly powered up to assess the operation of critical 
systems using both onboard and telemetered instrumentation. Any required 
power in the command module had been supplied during transearth coast from 
the lunar module through the umbilical connectors. It was through this 
means that the entry batteries were fully charged, with battery A requir- 
ing 15 hours and battery B approximately 3 hours. While these procedures 
represented a radical departure from normal operation, all were under- 
standable and easily accomplished to achieve the desired system readiness. 


Equipment transfer and stowage in both the command module and lunar 
module was completed about 7 hours prior to entry, with the exception of 
the cameras that were to be used for service module photography. At 6-1/2 
hours before entry, command module activity included powering up the in- 
strumentation and placing entry battery C on main bus A, with main bus B 
still powered from the lunar module. The command module reaction control 
thrusters were preheated for 20 minutes, and all instrumented engines were 
observed to be above the minimum operating temperature 10 minutes after 
heater operation was terminated. 


8-15 


8.9.3 Final Midcourse Correction 


Lunar module powerup for the final midcourse correction maneuver 
was performed according to the prescribed contingency checklist, with 
only minor deviations furnished by the ground. Shortly afterward, the 
lunar module windows cleared of moisture and the cabin temperature again 
became comfortable. Approximately 6 hours before entry, the passive 
thermal control mode was terminated and the spacecraft was maneuvered to 
place the earth in the crewmen optical alignment sight with the termina- 
tor parallel to the Y axis in preparation for the midcourse maneuver. At 
that time, a sun/moon alignment was made. Acquisition of these bodies 
was made by pitching up in a plane roughly parallel to the ecliptic plane. 
The sun filter made viewing through the telescope reticle very difficult. 
The spacecraft was controlled by the Lunar Module Pilot from commands 
given by the Commander, who responded when the reticle lines bisected the 
moon and solar disks. Three sets of marks were taken on each body. The 
initial maneuver to the firing attitude for the final midcourse correction 
was done manually using the earth as a reference in the same manner as the 
previous maneuver. This procedure presented no problems, even though the 
earth disk was considerably larger at this time. 


With primary guidance available, guidance system steering was man- 
ually followed to trim the spacecraft attitudes for the maneuver. Al- 
though the displayed attitudes looked favorable in comparison to ground- 
supplied and out-the-window readings , the primary guidance steering 
needles read full scale left in roll and yaw (section 6.4). At about 
137 hours 40 minutes, the lunar module reaction control system was used 
to provide a 2.9-ft/sec velocity correction. The maneuver was completed 
using manual pitch and roll control and abort guidance yaw control in a 
manner similar to that for the previous midcourse correction. 


8.9.4 Service Module Separation and Photography 


Following the lunar module maneuver to the service module separation 
attitude, the command module platform heaters were activated, the command 
module reaction control system was pressurized, and each individual thrust- 
er was fired. An abort guidance attitude reference was provided with all 
zeros displayed on the attitude error needles. The lunar module was 
placed in an attitude hold mode using the abort guidance system; X-axis 
translation was monitored on the displays. After the reaction control 
system check was completed, the Commander conducted a plus-X translation 
maneuver of 0.5 ft/sec, followed immediately by service module jettison. 
The pyro activation was heard and a minus 0.5-ft/sec translation maneuver 
was immediately commenced to remove the previously added velocity and 
preclude service module recontact. The jettison dynamics caused the un- 
docked vehicles to pitch down about 10 degrees. Control was then switched 
to primary guidance minimum impulse, and a pitchup maneuver was started to 


8-16 


sight the service module in the docking window. The lightened spacecraft 
combination was easily maneuvered using attitude control in both the man- 
ual minimum-impulse and automatic attitude-hold modes. 


The service module first appeared in the docking window at a dis- 
tance of about 80 feet. The entire bay 4 outer panel was missing, and 
torn Mylar insulation was seen protruding from the bay. Because of the 
brilliant reflections from the Mylar, it was difficult to see or photo- 
graph any details inside the bay. Initial photography of the service 
module was conducted through the docking window using the command module 
7O0-mm camera and an 80-mm lens. This camera, the 16-mm sequence camera 
with a 75-mm lens, and the command module electric still camera with a 
250-mm lens were then operated while viewing through the right-hand win- 
dow. Camera settings were made according to ground instructions. No 
magazine designation was made by the ground for the sequence camera, so 
the surface color film was used. 


Upon completion of photography, the two docked vehicles were maneu- 
vered back to the service module separation attitude in preparation for 
the command module alignment. Star observation through the command mod- 
ule optics in this attitude was poor because of light reflecting from the 
lunar module, and the Commander varied the pitch attitude by approximately 
20 degrees in an attempt to improve star visibility. These attitude ex- 
cursions, however, were not effective, and the spacecraft was returned 
to the original separation attitude for the command module alignment. 


8.9.5 Command Module Activation 


At 2-1/2 hours prior to entry, the command module was fully powered 
up and lunar module power transfer was terminated. After command module 
computer activation, the unfavorable spacecraft attitude delayed communi- 
cations signal lockup and the ensuing ground uplink commands. The stable 
platform was coarse aligned to ground-supplied reference angles, and an 
optical fine alignment made using two stars. Particles venting from the 
command module umibilical area impeded command module optics operation. 
With the lunar module attached to the command module and the command 
module optics pointed away from the sun, individual stars were barely 
visible through the optics. Also sun reflections from the lunar module 
sublimator and the nearest reaction control quad prevented positive iden- 
tification of constellations. 


8.9.6 Lunar Module Undocking 


The maneuver to the undocking attitude was made by the lunar module. 
Time consuming operations were followed to avoid gimbal lock of both space- 
craft platforms. Because of the difference in alignments between the two 


8-17 


spacecraft, considerable difficulty was encountered in maneuvering to the 
lunar module undocking attitude without driving the command module plat- 
form into gimbal lock. The maneuver required a complicated procedure 
using the lunar module platform and close cooperation between the Com- 
mander and Command Module Pilot. The resulting maneuver also used up con- 
siderable lunar module reaction control fuel. The final undocking atti- 
tude was very close to command module gimbal lock attitude. A different 
command module alignment procedure should have been used to prevent the 
probability of gimbal lock. 


Hatch closeout in both spacecraft was normal, and a successful com- 
mand module hatch integrity check was made, with a differential pressure 
of 3.4 psi. The command module environmental control and autopilot sys- 
tems were activated, and the lunar module was undocked 1 hour before en- 
try. Lunar module jettison was slightly louder than service module jet- 
tison and the lunar module was stable as it translated away using only 
tunnel pressure. While controllable by a single reaction control engine 
pulse, there was gs. continuous pitch-up torque on the command module which 
persisted until entry. 


8.10 ENTRY AND LANDING 


The entry attitude and platform alignment were confirmed by a suc- 
cessful sextant star check and moon occulatio within 1 second of the 
predicted time. The pre-entry check and initialization of the entry 
monitor system were normal. However, entry monitor system operation was 
initiated manually when the 0.05g light remained off 3 seconds after the 
actual 0.05g time (as discussed in section 14.1.5.). In addition, the 
entry monitor system trace was unexpectedly narrow and required excessive 
concentration to read. The guided entry was normal in all respects and 
was characterized by smooth control inputs. The first acceleration peak 
reached approximately 5g. 


Landing decelerations were mild in comparison to Apollo 8, and the 
spacecraft remained in the stable I flotation attitude after parachute 
release. Recovery proceeded rapidly and efficiently. Standard Navy life 
vests were passed to the crew by recovery personnel. For ease of donning 
and egress, these are preferable to the standard underarm flotation equip- 
ment. They would also quite effectively keep «nm unconscious crewman's 
head out of the water. 


9.0 BIOMEDICAL EVALUATION 


This section is a summary of Apollo 13 medical findings, based on 
preliminary analyses of biomedical data. From the medical point of view, 
the first 2 days of the Apollo 13 mission were completely routine. The 
biomedical data were excellent, and physiological parameters remained 
within expected ranges. Daily crew status reports indicated that the 
crewmen were obtaining adequate sleep, no medications were taken, and 
the radiation dosage was exactly as predicted. 


9.1 BIOINSTRUMENTATION AND PHYSIOLOGICAL DATA 


The biomedical data were excellent in quality during the period 
from launch to the occurrence of the inflight incident. Physiological 
data for the remainder of the mission were very scant. The command 
module was completely powered down, and this eliminated simultaneous 
biomedical monitoring capability. In the lunar module, only one electro- 
cardiogram signal for one crewman at a time can be monitored. However, 
even these medical data were sacrificed to improve air-to-ground commun- 
ications. 


Prior to the abort condition, physiological parameters were well 
within expected ranges. Just prior to the incident, heart and respira- 
tory rates of the crewmen were as follows. 


caauinen Heart rate, Respiratory rate, 
beats /min breaths/min 
Commander 68 18 
Command Module Pilot 65 15 
Lunar Module Pilot Te 12 








At 55:54:54, a telemetry dropout was observed. Immediately after 
the incident, crew heart rates ranged from 105 to 136 beats/min. These 
heart rates are well within normal limits and are indicative of stress 
and an increased workload. 


During the entry phase, biomedical data on the Command Module Pilot 
and Lunar Module Pilot were available. The Command Module Pilot's heart 
rate ranged from 60 to 70 beats/min. The Lunar Module Pilot's heart rate 
ranged from 100 to 125 beats/min, which in contrast to his basal rate was 


9=2 


an indication of an inflight illness detected after flight. The Commander 
had removed his bioharness shortly after the emergency incident; hence, 
no biomedical data were available from him during the entry. 


9.2 INFLIGHT HISTORY 


9.2.1 Adaptation to Weightlessness 


The Commander and the Command Module Pilot both reported a feeling 
of fullness in the head lasting for several hours on the first day of 
the mission. The Lunar Module Pilot reported a similar feeling and also 
that he felt like he was “hanging upside down." The Commander reported 
that all crewmen had red eyes the first day of the mission. 


Upon awakening on the second day of the mission, the Lunar Module 
Pilot complained of a severe headache. He took two aspirin, ate break- 
fast, and became immediately engaged in wrestrained physical activity. 
He then became nauseated, vomited once, and lay down for several hours. 
He then experienced no further nausea. The Lunar Module Pilot continued 
to take two aspirin every 6 hours to prevent recurrence of the headache. 
After the inflight incident, he took aspirin on only one occasion. 


9.2.2 Cabin Environment 


The major medical concern, recognized immediately after the abort 
decision, was the possibility of carbon dioxide buildup in the lunar 
module atmosphere. Since the physiological effects of increased carbon 
dioxide concentration are well known and readily recognizable with proper 
biomedical monitoring, the allowable limit of carbon dioxide buildup was 
increased from the nominal 7.6 to 15mm Hg. The carbon dioxide level was 
above 7.6mm Hg for only a 4-hour period, and no adverse physiological 
effects or degradation in crew performance resulted from this elevated 
concentration. Modified use of the lithium hydroxide cartridges (sec- 
tion 6.7) maintained the carbon dioxide partial pressure well below 1mm 
Hg for the remainder of the flight. 


9.2.3 Sleep 


The crew reported sleeping well the first 2 days of the mission. 
They all slept about 5-1/2 hours during the first sleep period. During 
the second period, the Commander, Command Module Pilot, and Lunar Module 
Pilot slept 5, 6, and 9 hours, respectively. The third sleep period was 
scheduled for 61 hours, but the oxygen tank incident at 56 hours pre- 
cluded sleep by any of the crew until approximately 80 hours. 


2=5 


After the incident, the command module was used as sleeping quarters 
until the cabin temperature became too cold. The crew then attempted to 
Sleep in the lunar module or the docking tunnel, but the temperature in 
these areas also dropped too low for prolonged, sound sleep. In addition, 
coolant pump noise from the lunar module and frequent communications with 
the ground further hindered sleep. The total sleep obtained by each crew- 
man during the remainder of the mission after the incident is estimated 
to have been 11, 12, and 19 hours for the Conmander, Command Module Pilot, 
and Lunar Module Pilot, respectively. 


9.2.4 Water 


Preflight testing of both command module and lunar module water sup- 
plies revealed no significant contaminants. The nickel content from sam- 
ples taken at the command module hot water port was 0.05 mg/l. Elevated 
nickel concentration has been a consistent finding in previous missions 
and has been ruled acceptable in view of no detrimental effects on crew 
physiology. There was a substantial buildup in total bacterial count 
from the time of final filling of the command module potable water system 
until final preflight sampling 24 hours prior to launch. This count was 
deemed acceptable under the assumption the first inflight chlorination 
would reduce the bacterial population to specification levels. Preflight 
procedures will be reviewed to investigate methods of preventing growth 
of organisms in the command module water system during the countdown 
phase. The inflight chlorination schedule was followed prior to the in- 
cident, after which the potable water was not chlorinated again. 


The crew rationed water and used it sparingly after the oxygen tank 
incident. Not more than 24 ounces of water were consumed by each crewman 
after the incident. The crew reported that the juice bags contained about 
20 percent gas, but that this amount was not enough to cause any distress. 


9.2.5 Food 


The flight menus were similar to those of prior Apollo missions and 
were designed to provide approximately 2100 kilocalories per man per day. 
The menus were selected on the basis of crew preferences determined by 
preflight evaluation of representative flight foods. There were no mod- 
ifications to the menu as a result of the late crew change. New food 
items for this mission included meatballs with sauce, cranberry-orange 
relish, chicken and rice soup, pecans, natural orange juice crystals, 
peanut butter, and jelly. Mustard and tomato catsup were also provided 
for the sandwiches. 


9-h 


The crew followed the flight menus prior to the inflight incident 
and maintained a complete log of foods consumed. To conserve water dur- 
ing the abort phase, the crew consumed only those foods which did not 
require water for rehydration. The crew drank juices in preference to 
plain water to help maintain their electrolyte balance. 


The crew's comments about the quality of the food were generally 
favorable, but they reported that food packaging and stowage could be 
improved. The crew encountered some difficulty in removing the meal 
packages from the lower equipment bay food container and in replacing 
some uneaten food items. Preflight briefings of future crews should 
alleviate these difficulties. 


Syneresis, or separation of a liquid from a solid, occurred in some 
of the canned sandwich spreads, particularly the ham salad. The free 
liquid escaped when the can was opened, and the salad was too dry to 
spread. The crew commented on the positive pressure in the bread pack- 
ages, which was expected since there was only a slight vacuum on these 
packages. Any additional vacuum would compress the bread to an uwnaccept- 
able state, and if the packages were punctured, the bread would become 
dry and hard. The crew recommended a change which has been implemented 
wherein Velcro patches will be attached to the bread, mustard, and catsup 
packages. 


9.2.6 Radiation 


The personal radiation dosimeters were inadvertently stowed in the 
pockets of the crewmen's suits shortly after lift-off. The Command Mod- 
ule Pilot's dosimeter was uwnstowed at 23 hours and was hung under the 
command and service module optics for the remainder of the mission. The 
final reading from this dosimeter yielded a net integrated (uncorrected) 
dose of 410 mrad. The other two dosimeters yielded net doses of 290 and 
340 mrad. 


The Van Allen belt dosimeter registered a maximum skin dose rate of 
2.27 rad/hr and a maximum depth dose rate of 1.35 rad/hr while ascending 
through the belt at about 3 hours. Dose rates during descending belt 
passage and total integrated doses were not obtained because of command 
module power-down and later, by the absence of high-bit-rate telemetry 
during the entry phase. 


The crewmen were examined.by total body gamma spectroscopy 30 days 
before flight and 6 and 16 days after recovery. Analyses of the gamma 
spectrum data for each crewman revealed no induced radioactivity. How- 
ever, the analyses did show a significant decrease in total body potassium 
(K¥°) for each crewman as compared to preflight values. Total body potas- 
sium values determined on the second postflight examination had returned 
to preflight values for each crewman. 


9=) 


The absorbed dose from ionizing radiation was approximately 250 mrad, 
which is well below the threshold of detectable medical effects. The 
crew-absorbed dose from the neutron component of the SNAP=27 (part of ex- 
periment package) radiation cannot be determined quantitatively at this 
time. Preliminary evaluations indicated that it was also well below the 
threshold of detectable medical effects. 


9.2.7 Medications 


The crew attempted to use the Afrin spray bottles but reported they 
were unable to obtain sufficient spray, as discussed in section 14.3.3. 
The crew also repcrted that the thermometer in the medical kit did not 
register within scale. Postflight analysis of the medical kit has shown 
that the thermometer operates properly and a procedural error resulted 
in the failure to obtain a correct oral temperature inflight. Medica- 
tions used by each of the crewmen are shown in the following table: 


Medication Time of use 


Commander Aspirin Unknown 
Dexedrine 2 or 3 hours prior to 
entry 


Command Module Pilot Lomotil After 98 hours 
Aspirin Unknown 
Dexedrine-Hyoscine | 1 or 2 hours prior to 
entry 


Lunar Module Pilot Aspirin every Second mission day until 
6 hours the incident 
Dexedrine-Hyoscine | 1 or 2 hours prior to 
entry 





9.2.8 Visual Phenomena 


The crew reported seeing point flashes or streaks of light, as had 
been previously observed by the Apollo 11 and 12 crews. The crewmen 
were aware of these flashes only when relaxed, in the dark, and with 
their eyes closed. They described the flashes as "pinpoint novas ," 
"roman candles," and "similar to traces in a-cloud chamber." More point 
flashes than streaks were observed, and the color was always white. 


Estimates of the frequency ranged from 4 flashes per hour to 2 flashes 
per minute. 


9-6 


9.3 PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS 


Preflight physical. examinations of both the primary and backup crews 
were conducted 30 days prior to launch, and examinations of the primary 
crew only were conducted 15 and 5 days prior to launch. The Lunar Module 
Pilot suffered a sore throat 18 days before launch, and throat swabs from 
all three crewmen were cultured on two occasions. Since the organism 
identified was not considered pathogenic and the crew showed no symptoms 
of illness, no treatment was necessary. 


Eight days before flight, the primary Command Module Pilot was ex- 
posed to rubella (German measles) by a member of the backup crew. The 
physical. examination 5 days before flight was normal, but laboratory 
studies revealed that the primary Command Module Pilot had no immunity 
to rubella. Consequently, on the day prior to launch the final decision 
was made to replace the primary Command Module Pilot with the backup Com- 
mand Module Pilot. A complete physical examination had been conducted on 
the backup Command Module Pilot 3 days before flight, and no significant 
findings were present in any preflight histories or examinations. 


Postflight physical examinations were conducted immediately after 
recovery. These physical examinations were normal, although all crew- 
men were extremely fatigued and the Lunar Module Pilot had a urinary 
tract infection. While standing during portions of his postflight physi- 
cal examination, the Lunar Module Pilot had several. episodes of dizziness, 
which were attributed to fatigue, the effects of weightlessness, and the 
urinary tract infection. The Commander, Command Module Pilot, and Lunar 
Module Pilot exhibited weight losses of 14, 11, and 6.5 pounds, respec- 
tively. In the final 4 or 5 hours of the flight, the Lunar Module Pilot 
drank considerably more water than did the other crewmen and possibly 
replenished his earlier body fluid losses. 


The Command Module Pilot had a slight irritation at the site of the 
superior sensor on the upper chest, but the Commander and Lunar Module 
Pilot had no irritation at any sensor sites. 


10-1 
10.0 MISSION SUPPORT PERFORMANCE 


10.1 FLIGHT CONTROL 


The operational support provided by the flight control team was sat- 
isfactory and timely in safely returning the Apollo 13 crew. Only the 
inflight problems which influenced flight control operation and their 
resultant effects on the flight plan are discussed. 


Prior to launch, the supercritical-helium pressure in the lunar 
module descent propulsion system increased at sn abnormally high rate. 
After cold soak and venting, the rise rate was considered acceptable for 
launch. At 56 how's during the first entry into the lunar module, the 
rise rate and pressure were reported to be satisfactory; therefore, a 
special venting procedure was not required. 


A master caution and warning alarm at 38 hours indicated the hydro- 
gen tank pressures were low. As a result, it was planned to use the 
cryogenic tank fans more often than scheduled to provide a more even 
distribution of fluid and to stabilize heat and pressure rise rates. 


The two tanks cortaining cryogenic oxygen, used for fuel cell opera-~ 
tion and crew breathing, experienced a problem at about 56 hours, as de- 
scribed in section 14.1.1 and reference 1. This condition resulted in 
the following flight control decisions: 


a. Abort the primary mission and attempt a safe return to earth as 
rapidly as possible. 


b. Shut down all command and service module systems to conserve 
consumables for entry. 


c. Use the lunar module for life support and any propulsive maneu- 
vers. 


Powering down of the command and service modules and powering up of 
the lunar module were completed at 58:40:00. The optimum plan for a 
safe and quick return required an immediate descent engine firing to a 
free-return circumlunar trajectory, with a pericynthion-plus-2-hour ma- 
neuver (transearth injection) to expedite the landing to about 142:30:00. 
Two other midcourse corrections were performed, the first using the de- 
scent engine. Only essential life support, navigation, instrumentation, 
and communication systems were operated to maximize electrical power and 
cooling water margins. Detailed monitoring of all consumables was con- 
tinuously maintained to assess these margins, and the crew was always 


10-2 


advised of their consumables status. A procedure was developed on the 
ground and used by the crew to allow use of command module lithium hy- 
droxide cartridges for carbon dioxide removal in the lunar module environ- 
mental control system (see section 6.8). The passive thermal control 

mode was established using the lunar module reaction control system and 
was satisfactorily maintained throughout transearth coast. 


A major flight control function, in addition to the monitoring of 
systems status and maintaining of consumable quantities above red-line 
values, was to determine the procedures to be used immediately prior to 
and during entry. After satisfactory procedures were established, they 
were verified in a simulator prior to advising the crew. These procedures 
called for first separating the service module, remaining on lunar module 
environmental control and power as late as possible, coaligning the two 
platforms, and separating the lunar module using tunnel pressure. The 
command module tunnel hatch was installed and a leak check was performed 
prior to lunar module undocking, which occurred about 1 hour before entry. 
All spacecraft operations were normal from undocking through landing, 
which occurred very close to the established target. 


10.2 NETWORK 


The Mission Control Center and the Manned Space Flight Network pro- 
vided excellent support throughout this aborted mission. Minor problems 
occurred at different sites around the network, but all were corrected 
with no consequence to flight control support. Momentary data losses 
occurred seven different times as a result of power amplifier faults, 
computer processor executive buffer depletion, or wave guide faults. On 
each occasion, data lock-up was regained in just a few minutes. 


10.3 RECOVERY OPERATIONS 


The Department of Defense provided recovery support commensurate with 
mission planning for Apollo 13. Because of the emergency which resulted 
in premature termination of the mission, additional support was provided 
by the Department of Defense and offers of assistance were made by many 
foreign nations, including England, France, Greece, Spain, Germany, 
Uruguay, Brazil, Kenya, the Netherlands, Nationalist China, and the Soviet 
Union. As a result of this voluntary support, a total of 21 ships and 
17 aircraft were available for supporting an Indian Ocean landing, and 
51 ships and 21 aircraft for an Atlantic Ocean landing. In the Pacific 
Ocean, there were 13 ships and 17 aircraft known to be available over and 
above the forces designated for primary recovery support. 


10-3 


Support for the primary recovery area consisted of the prime recovery 
ship, USS Iwo Jima, five helicopters from the Iwo Jima, and two HC-130H 
rescue aircraft. Later, the experimental mine sweeper, USS Granville 
Hall, and two HC-130H aircraft were added to the end-of-mission array. 

One of the helicopters, designated "Recovery," carried the flight sur- 
geon, and was utilized for retrieval of the crew. Two of the helicopters, 
designated "Swim 1" and "Swim 2," carried swimmers and the necessary re- 
covery equipment. A fourth helicopter, designated "Photo" was used as 

a photographic platform, and the fifth helicopter, designated "Relay ," 
served as a communications relay aircraft. The four aircraft, designated 
"Samoa Rescue 1, 2, 3, and 4," were positioned to track the command mod- 
ule after exit from blackout, as well as to provide pararescue capability 
had the command module landed uprange or downrange of the target point. 
The USS Granville Hall was positioned to provide support in the event 
that a constant-g (backup) entry had to be flown. Table 10.3-I lists all 
the dedicated recovery forces for the Apollo 13 mission. 


TABLE 10.3-I.- RECOVERY SUPPORT 


Support iz 
bending ane8 Number Unit 


Launch site Landing craft utility (landing craft with command 
module retrieval capability) - USS Paiute 
Helicopter with para-rescue team staged from Patrick 
AFB, Florida 
Helicopters capable of lifting the command module; 
each with para-rescue team staged from Patrick AFB, 
Florida 


Helicopters staged from Norfolk NAS, Virginia 


Launch abort USS New 


Fixed wing aircraft; one each staged from McCoy AFB, 
Florida; Pease AFB, New Mexico; and Lajes AFB, 
Azores 


Earth orbit USS New 
Fixed wing aircraft staged from Ascension 


Primary end-of-mission, USS Iwo Jima 
Mid-Pacific earth USS Benjamin Stoddert 
orbital, and deep- Helicopters staged from USS Iwo Jima 
space secondary HC-130H | Fixed wing aircraft staged from Hickam AFB, Hawaii 





*rotal ship support = 5 
Total aircraft support = 23 


10-4 


10.3.1 Command Module Location and Retrieval 


The Iwo Jima's position was established accurately using a satellite 
navigation system. A navigation fix was obtained at 1814 G.m.t., 
April 17, 1970, and the position of the ship at spacecraft landing was 
dead~reckoned back to the time of landing and determined to be 21 degrees 
34.7 minutes south latitude and 165 degrees 23.2 minutes west longitude. 
At landing a radar range of 8000 yards and a visual bearing of 158.9 de- 
grees east of north (true heading) were obtained from which the command 
module landing point was determined to be 21 degrees 38 minutes 24 sec- 
onds south latitude and 165 degrees 21 minutes 42 seconds west longitude. 
This position is judged to be accurate to within 500 yards. 


The ship-based aircraft were deployed relative to the Iwo Jima and 
were on station 20 minutes prior to landing. They departed station to 
commence recovery activities upon receiving notice of visual contact with 
the descending command module. Figure 10.3~-1 depict an approximation of 
the recovery force positions just prior to the sighting of the command 
module. 


NASA-S-70-5835 
21°20' 








Swim 2 


ao 
° 












O° 
Res 
si a8 USS Iwo Jima 
2° Rescue 1 1% J] 
eo Target point 
USS Hall 
ea 


Rescue 2 
26° meneame 
172° 170° 168°} 166° 164° 162° 


West longitude 
Swim 1 Recovery area deployment 


South latitude 


FN) DN ey 











21°30' 


South jatitude 





USS Iwo Jima 


Photo Recovery 


Relay 
@Landing point 


" a 
Target point®  @ Retrieval point 











aieag: Le 
165°40' 165°35' 165°30' 165°25' 165°20' 165°15' 
West longitude 


Figure 10.3-1.~ Recovery support at earth landing. 


10-5 


The first reported electronic contact by the recovery forces was 
through S-band contact by Samoa Rescue 4. A visual sighting report by 
the Recovery helicopter was received and was followed shortly thereafter 
by aquisition of the recovery beacon signal by the Recovery, Photo, and 
Swim 1 helicopters. Fuel dump was noted and voice contact was made with 
the descending spacecraft, although no latitude and longitude data were 
received. The command module landed at 1807 G.m.t. and remained in the 
stable 1 flotation attitude. The flashing light was operating and the 
inflation of the uprighting system commenced about 10 minutes subsequent 
to landing. 


After confirming the integrity of the command module and the status 
of the crew, the Recovery helicopter crew attempted to recover the main 
parachutes with grappling hooks and flotation gear prior to their sinking. 
Swim 1 and Swim 2 helicopters arrived on scene and immediately proceeded 
with retrieval. Swim 2 deployed swimmers to provide flotation to the 
spacecraft, and Swim 1 deployed swimmers to retrieve the apex cover, which 
was located upwind of the spacecraft. The flight crew was onboard the 
recovery helicopter 7 minutes after they had egressed the command module, 
and they arrived aboard Iwo Jima at 1853 G.m.t. 


Command module retrieval took place at 21 degrees 39.1 minutes south 
latitude and 165 degrees 20.9 minutes west longitude at 1936 G.m.t. One 
main parachute and the apex cover were retrieved by small boat and brought 
aboard. 


The flight crew remained aboard the Iwo Jima overnight and were flown 
to Pago Pago, Samoa, the following morning. A C-141 aircraft then took 
the crew to Hawaii, and following a ceremony and an overnight stay, they 
were returned to Houston. 


Upon arrival of the Iwo Jima in Hawaii, the command module was off- 
loaded and taken to Hickam Air Force Base for deactivation. Two and one 
half days later, the command module was flown to the manufacturer's plant 
at Downey, California aboard a C~133 aircraft. 


The following is a chronological listing of events during the recovery 
operations. 


10-6 


Event 


S-band contact by Samoa Rescue 4 

Visual contact by Swim 2 

VHF recovery beacon contact by Recovery/Swim 1 
helicopters 

Voice contact by Recovery helicopter 

Visual contact by Relay/Recovery helicopters / 
Iwo Jima 

Command module landed, remained in stable I 

Swimmers deployed to retrieve main parachutes 

First swimmer deployed to command module 

Flotation collar inflated 

Life preserver unit delivered to lead swimmer 

Command module hatch opened 

Helicopter pickup of flight crew completed 

Recovery helicopter on board Iwo Jima 


Command module secured aboard Iwo Jima 

Flight crew departed Iwo Jima 

Wiighe eee arrival in Houston 

Iwo Jima arrival in Hawaii 

Safing of command module pyrotechnics completed 
Deactivation of the fuel and oxidizer completed 


Command module delivered to Downey, California 


April 17, 1970 


1801 
1802 


1803 
1803 


1807 
1809 
1816 
1824 
1831 
1832 


18h2 
1853 
1936 
April 18 
1820 
April 20 
0330 
April 24 
1930 
April 25 
0235 
April 26 
1928 
April 27 
1400 





10-7 


10.3.2 Postrecovery Inspection 


Although the standard format was followed during the deactivation 
and postrecovery ‘inspection of the command module, it should be noted 
that extreme caution was taken during these operations to insure the 
integrity of the command module for postflight evaluation of the anomaly. 
After deactivation, the command module was sectired and guarded. 


The following disscrepancies were noted during the postrecovery 
inspection: 


a. Some of the radioluminescent disks were broken. 

b. The apex cover was broken on the extravehicular handle side. 
ec. The docking ring was burned and broken. 

d. The right--hand roll thruster was blistered. 


e. A yellowish/tan film existed on the outside of the hatch win- 
dow, left and right rendezvous windows, and the right-hand window. 


f. The interior surfaces of the command module were very damp and 
cold, assumed to be condensation; there was no pooling of water on the 
floor. 


g. Water samples could not be taken from the spacecraft tanks (dis- 
cussed in section 5.8). 


h. The postlanding ventilation exhaust valve was open and the inlet 
valve was closed; the postlanding ventilation valve unlock handle was 
apparently jammed between the lock and unlock ‘positions (section 14.1.2). 


i. There was more and deeper heat streaking in the area of the 
compression and shear pads than has been normally observed. 


11-1 
11.0 EXPERIMENTS 
11.1 ATMOSPHERIC ELECTRICAL PHENOMENA 


As a result of the electrical disturbances experienced during the 
Apollo 12 launch, the value of further research in this area was recog- 
nized and several experiments were performed prior to and during the 
Apollo 13 launch to study certain aspects of lawnch-phase electrical phe- 
nomena. The separate experiments consisted of measurements of the atmos- 
pheric electric field, low-frequency and very-low-frequency radio noise, 
the air/earth current density, and the electrical current flowing in the 
earth's surface, all of which result from perturbations generated by the 
launch vehicle and its exhaust plume. The analysis of the Apollo 12 
lightning incident is reported in reference 3. 


11.1.1 Electric Field Measurements 


As shown in figures 11.1-1 and 11.1-2, a network of nine calibrated 
electric field meters was installed in the area to the north and west of 
the launch site. Seven of the field meters were connected to multiple 
channel recorders so that any excursions of the electric field intensity 
could be measured over a wide range of values. A special device was op- 
erated at site 5, located on the beach 4 miles northwest of the launch 
site. This device was installed to measure rapid changes in the electric 
field and was used, together with a sferics detector, to sense the electro- 
magnetic radiation generated by lightning or other significant electrical 
discharges. 


Illustrative data from the field instruments during launch are shown 
in figure 11.1-3. Very large perturbations of the normal electric field 
were recorded on meters at sites 1, 2, and 3 located near the launch 
tower. First, there was a rapid increase in the positive direction, 
followed by a slower negative decrease. Data taken at site 4, however, 
did not indicate any significant variations in field intensity. Excellent 
records at several sensitivity levels were obtained at site 7. The field 
perturbation immediately following launch rose to a maximum of 1200 volts/ 
meter in about 25 seconds. The direction of field change then reversed, 
and a negative peak of some 300 volts/meter was reached in about 115 sec- 
onds. Thereafter, the field gradually returned to the unperturbed value. 


At site 6, the record was similar to that for site 7 with an initial 
positive excursion followed by a slower negative change. At this station, 
however, there were large fluctuations superimposed on the record, as 
shown in figure 11.1-3(b). These fluctuations could have been caused by 


11-2 


NASA-S-70-5836 


Distance 
from 
vehicle, ft 


1360 
2400 
4920 
7220 
23 700 


Figure 11.1-1.- Field meter location in 





Distance 

from 

vehicle, ft 
1310 
1250 
2600 
5740 


the launch site area. 


11-3 


NASA-S-70-5837 









O Site 2 


O Site 8 


© Site 7 


Legend: 


O Field mili locations _———] 
O Recorder locations 400 8 400 f 
BS) 


A Electrodes SCALE IN FEET 


Figure 11.1-2.- Field meter locations in the proximity 
of the launch complex. 


gravel and dust stirred up by the exhaust of the launch vehicle engine. 
After launch, a quantity of such debris was found near the surface of the 
field meter and its surrounding area. After the oscillations had subsided 
at T plus 40 seconds, there was a large negative field of approximately 
minus 3000 volts/meter which probably resulted from the exhaust and steam 
clouds that tended to remain over site 6. 


Because of access restrictions to sites 8 and 9, the corresponding 
recorders were started several hours prior to launch and unfortunately 
had stopped before lift-off. However, substantial positive and negative 
field perturbations found on the stationary parts of the records were 
greater than anything found on the moving portion. Comparison of these 
records with those from sites 6 and 7 confirmed that the only large field 
perturbations were those accompanying launch. Consequently, the peak 
excursions of the records at sites 8 and 9 could be confidently associated 
with the maximum field perturbations occurring just after lift-off. 


11-4 


Launch vehicle altitude, km 


Electric field intensity, V/cm 


NASA-S-70-5838 


Site 1 
Field meter location, (415 meters east) 


Site 2 
(730 nieters north-northeast) 





5 Site 3 
ud ~ (1500 meters north-northwest) 
0 1 


Site 4 


5 
| (2200 meters west) 
0 en a eee 


Lift-off 
15 een 








10 |- 
Site 7 
5 \- (380 meters west) 
0 
fh 
1410 1415 1420 1425 


Time, hr:min,e.s.t. April 11, 1970 


(a) Sites 1 to 4 and 7. 


Figure 11.1-3.- Electrical discharge data for the Apollo 13 launch. 


11-5 


NASA-S -70- 5839 








Site 6 
(400 meters south) 











Electric field intensity, volts/meter 



































4000 
1413 1414 1415 1416 
Time. hr:min. e.s.t. April 11, 1970 


(b) Site 6. 
Figure 11.1-3.- Concluded 


No significant perturbation in the electric field was produced by 
the launch cloud at stations 4 or 5, although small-scale fluctuations, 
apparently resulting from vibrations, can be seen on the records of the 
fine weather field at both stations. 


The field~-change and sferics detectors at site 5 gave no indication 
of any lightning-like discharge during launch, although sporadic signals 
were later recorded during the afternoon of launch day. These signals 
probably came from lightning in a cold front which was stalled some dis- 
tance to the northwest of the launch site and which passed over the 
launch site on April 12. 


The above field meter records indicate the launch of the Apollo 13 
vehicle produced a significant separation of electrical charge which 
could possibly increase the hazard in an otherwise marginal weather 
situation. At the present time the location and amount of the charge on 
the vehicle or exhaust clouds or a combination thereof are not well under-- 
stood. 


11-6 


It is known that the electrostatic potentials develop on jet air- 
craft. These are caused by an engine charging current, which is balanced 
by a corona current loss from the aircraft. For.a conventional jet air- 
craft, the equilibrium potential can approach a million volts. For the 
Saturn V launch vehicle, the charging current may be larger than that of 
a jet aircraft, and therefore, the equilibrium potential for the Saturn 
vehicle might be on the order of a million volts or more. 


11-7 


11.1.2 Very-Low and Low-Frequency Radio Noise 


To monitor the low-frequency radio noise, a broad-band antenna sys- 
tem was used at site 7 to feed five receivers, tuned respectively to 
1.5 kHz, 6 kHz, 27 kHz, 51 kHz, and 120 kHz. 


During launch, a sudden onset of radio noise was observed almost 
coincidently with the start of the electric field perturbation. This 
onset was very well marked on all but the 1.5 kHz channel. Following 
onset, the noise levels at 120 and at 51 kHz tended to decrease slowly 
in intensity for some 20 seconds. However, the noise levels at 27 and 
at 6 kHz increased and reached their maxima after about 15 seconds. 
Furthermore, substantial noise at 1.5 kHz was first apparent at 5 sec- 
onds after lift-off and also peaked out in about 15 seconds. 


If the Saturn V vehicle is charged to a potential of several million 
volts, corona discharges will be produced which, in turn, generate radio 
noise. The onset of these discharges should occur very soon after lift- 
off and reach a maximum when the launch vehicle is still close to the 
ground. Radio noise records strongly support this conclusion. The sud- 
den onset of the noise probably corresponds closely to lift-off. It is 
interesting that, at about 15 seconds after lift-off, the noise became 
enhanced at the lower rather than the higher frequencies. This phenomenon 
implies that larger discharges occur at these times. The most intense 
discharges would be expected to occur soon after the launch vehicle and 
its exhaust plume clear the launch tower. 


11.1.3 Measurement of Telluric Current 


The experiment to measure telluric current consisted of an electrode 
placed close to the launch site and two electrodes spaced approximately 
2500 feet from the base electrode at a 90-degree included angle (shown 
in figure 11.1-2). The telluric current system failed to detect any launch 
effects. It was expected that the current would show an increase until 
the vehicle exhaust plume broke effective electrical contact with ground. 
The high density of metallic conductors in the ground near the launch site 
may have functioned as a short circuit, which would have negated the de- 
tection of any changes in the current level. 


11.1.4 Measurement of the Air/Earth Current Density 


Three balloons containing instruments designed to measure the air/ 
earth current density were launched: at 6:52 p.m. on April 9, 1970, and 
at 1:14 p.m. and 1:52 p.m. on April 11, 1970. The first two balloons 
provided the "fair weather" base for the experiment. At lift-off, the 
third balloon was about 12.2 miles southeast of the launch site at an 


11-8 


altitude of 20 000 feet. Forty-five seconds after lift-off, the current 
density, which had been oscillating at a frequency of about 15 cycles 
per minute, showed a marked increase in amplitude. This variation in 
current was again observed when the balloon reached an altitude between 
40 000 and 50 000 feet. The frequency of the observed current variation 
was also noted from the balloon released at 1:14 p.m. The cause of the 
oscillating current and the enhancement thereof are not yet understood. 


11.2 EARTH PHOTOGRAPHY APPLIED TO GEOSYNCHRONOUS SATELLITES 


The determination of the wind field in the atmosphere is one of the 
prime requirements for accurate long-range numerical weather prediction. 
Wind fields are also the most difficult to measure with the desired sam- 
ple density (as discussed in ref. 4). The output of the geosynchronous 
Advanced Technology Satellites I and III is now being used as a crude 
estimate of wind fields by comparing the translation of clouds between 
successive frames 20 minutes apart. This comparison does not define the 
wind field, however, as a function of height above the surface, which is 
an important restriction to data application. The ability to determine 
the height of cloud elements would add this dimension to the satellite 
wind field analysis. A capability to determine cloud height has been 
demonstrated by use of stereographic photogrammetry on low altitude photo- 
graphs taken from Apollo 6 (ref. 5). This success suggests that cloud 
heights and therefore wind velocity may also be determined by using data 
gathered from pairs of geosynchronous satellites located 10 to 20 degrees 
apart in longitude. Calculations indicate, however, that stereoscopic 
determination of cloud heights from geosynchronous altitudes would be 
marginal, at best, because of the small disparity angles involved 
(ref. 6). 


To aid in a test of the feasibility of performing stereoscopic de- 
termination of cloud height at synchronous altitudes, a series of earth- 
centered photographs at 20-minute intervals, beginning soon after trans- 
lunar injection, were planned. The photographs required for this test 
could only have been acquired from an Apollo lunar mission. A precise 
record of time of photography was required to reconstruct the geometry 
involved. Eleven photographs were taken, and a precise time record was 
obtained. The description of the location of the spacecraft at the time 
of each photograph is given in table 11.2-I, along with the time of pho- 
tography, the enlargement required on each frame for normalization, and 
the distance between photographic points. The experiment was successful, 
and all photographs are of excellent quality. To support the analysis 
of these photographs, aircraft reports, synoptic weather charts and sat-— 
ellite photographs for the time of photography have been acquired. Un- 
fortunately, Advanced Technology Satellite I was out of operation on 
the day of photography. 


11-9 


TABLE 11.2-I.- EARTH WEATHER PHOTOGRAPHY 





Mission elapsed Altitude Normalization Distance 
a cataee 7 time seeieke Latitude Longitude Farth radii enlargement apart 
., hr:min:sec . a. Mile required mile 


(from center) 
13-60-8590 07:17:14 02:30:46 | 28938'N* | 130°00'w® 
13-60-8591 07:39:47 02:52:49 | 28°25'N 134933'W 
13-60-8592 08:42:07 | 03:55:09 | 27°hg'n® | 147°30'w® 
13-60-8593 09:03:11 | ols26:13 | 27°39'N 151°39'W 


13-60-8594, 09:26:34 04:29:36 27°2h'N 156°35'W 


13-60-8595 09:47:10 05:00:12 | 27°14'n® | 161°00'w? 


13-60-8596 10:08:39 05:22:41 27°04 'N 165°h9'w 
13-60-8597 1@:; 30:59 05:44:01 26°5k'N 170°50'W 


a 


13-60-8598 10:52:59 06:96:01 26°h5 ‘8 175°S1'W 


13-60-8599 11:14:59 06:28:01 26°36'N 179° 14'E 

















13-60-8600 11:37:19 06:50:22 26°2T'N 174°09'E 





*positiens are extrapolated. 


The 11 photographs have been normalized so that the earth is the 
same size in all frames. Frames 8590 and 8591 have been further enlarged. 
By viewing these two frames under a stereoscope, pronounced apparent relief 
is seen in the cloud patterns. The relief is so pronounced, in fact, that 
it cannot be attributed solely to height differences of clouds. It appears 
to result, in part., from the relative horizontal motion in the cloud fields; 
that is, clouds moving in the same direction as the spacecraft appear far- 
ther away than those moving in the direction opposite that of the space- 
craft. 


11.3 SEISMIC DETECTION OF THIRD STAGE LUNAR IMPACT 


In prior lunar missions, the third stage has been separated from the 
spacecraft with the intention of entering a solar orbit through a near- 
miss, or "slingshot," approach to the moon. For Apollo 13, an opportunity 
was available to gain further data on large-mass impact phenomena which 
could be derived using the seismic equipment deployed during Apollo 12. 
The impact of the lunar module ascent stage during Apollo 12 pointed up 
certain unexplained seismological events which the S-IVB impact was ex- 
pected to reproduce. 


11-10 


The S-IVB impacted the lunar surface at 8:09:41 p.m. e.s.t., 
April 14, 1970, travelling at a speed of 5600 miles/hr. Stage weight 
at the time of impact was 30 700 pounds. The collision occurred at a 
latitude of 2.4 degrees south and a longitude of 27.9 degrees west, which 
is approximately 74 miles west-northwest from the experiment station in- 
stalled during Apollo 12. The energy release from the impact was equiv- 
alent to an explosion of 7.7 tons of trinitrotoluene (TNT). 


Seismic signals were first recorded 28.4 seconds after impact and 
continued for over 4 hours. Some signals were so large that seismometer 
sensitivity had to be reduced by command from earth to keep the data on 
scale. Peak signal intensity occurred 10 minutes after initial onset. 
The peak value was 8 times larger than that recorded from the Apollo 12 
ascent stage impact, which occurred at a range of 40 miles from the seis- 
mic station and was equivalent to 1 ton of TNT. An expanding gas cloud, 
which presumably swept out over the lunar surface from the S-IVB impact 
point, was recorded by the lunar ionosphere detector deployed during 
Apollo 12. Detection of this cloud began approximately 8 seconds before 
the first seismic signal and lasted 70 seconds. 


The character of the signal from the S-IVB impact is identical to 
that of the ascent stage impact and those from natural events, presumed 
to be meteoroid impacts, which are being recorded at the rate of about 
one per day. The S-IVB seismic energy is believed to have penetrated into 
the moon to a depth of from 20 to 40 kilometers. The initial signal was 
unusually clear and travelled to the seismic station at a velocity of 
4.8 km/sec, which is near that predicted from laboratory measurements 
using Apollo 12 lunar rock samples. This result implies that, to depths 
of at least 20 kilometers, the moon's outer shell may be formed from the 
same crystalline rock material as found at the surface. No evidence of 
a lower boundary to this material has been found in the seismic signal, 
although it is clear the material is too dense to form the entire moon. 


An unexplained characteristic of the S-IVB impact is the rapid buildup 
from its beginning to the peak value. This initial stage of the signal 
cannot be explained solely by the scattering of seismic waves in a rubble- 
type material, as was thought possible from the ascent stage impact data. 
Several alternate hypotheses are under study, but no firm conclusions have 
been reached. Signal scattering, however, may explain the character of 
the later part of the signal. ; 


The fact that such precise targeting accuracy was possible for the 
S-IVB impact, with the resulting seismic signals so large, have greatly 
encouraged seismologists to study possible future S-IVB impacts. For 
ranges extended to 500 kilometers, the data return could provide a means 
for determining moon structures to depths approaching 200 kilometers. 


12-1 
12.0 ASSESSMENT OF MISSION OBJECTIVES 
The four primary objectives (see ref. 7) assigned to the Apollo 13 


mission were as follows: 


a. Perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of ma- 
terials in a preselected region of the Fra Mauro formation. 


b. Deploy and activate an Apollo lunar surface experiments package. 
ec. Further develop man's capability to work in the lunar environment. 
d. Obtain photographs of candidate exploration sites. 

Thirteen detailed objectives, listed in table 12-I and described in 


reference 8, were derived from the four primary objectives. None of 
these objectives were accomplished because the mission was aborted. In 


TABLE 12-I.- DETAILED OBJECTIVES AND EXPERIMENTS 


Description Completed 

B Television coverage No 

Cc Contingency sample collection No 

D Selected sample collection No 

E Evaluation of landing accuracy techniques No 

F Photographs of candidate exploration sites No 

G Extravehicular communication performance No 

H Lunar soil mechnics No 

T Dim light photography No 

J Selenodetic reference point update No 
K CSM orbital science photography No 

L Transearth lunar photography No 

M EMU water consumption measurement No 

N Thermal coating degradation No 
ALSEP III Apollo lunar surface experiments package No 
S-059 Lunar field geology No 
S-080 Solar wind composition No 
S-164 S-band transponder exercise No 
S-170 Downlink bistatic radar observations of the Moon No 
S-178 Gegenschein from lunar orbit No 
S-184 Lunar surface close-up photography No 


T-029 Pilot describing function Yes 





12-2 


addition to the spacecraft and lunar surface objectives, the following 
two launch vehicle secondary objectives were assigned: 


a. Attempt to impact the expended S-IVB stage on the lunar surface 
within 350 km of the targeted impact point of 3 degrees south latitude 
and 30 degrees west longitude under nominal flight control conditions to 
excite the Apollo 12 seismometer. 


b. Postflight determination of the actual time and location of S-IVB 
impact to within 1 second. 


Both objectives were accomplished, and the results are documented in 
reference 2. The impact was successfully detected by the seismometer and 
is reported in greater detail in section 11.3. 


Seven scientific experiments, in addition to those contained in the 
lunar surface experiment package, were also assigned as follows: 

a. Lunar field geology (S-059) 

b. Pilot describing function (T-029) 

ec. Solar wind composition (S-080) 

d. S-band transponder exercise (S-16}) 

Downlink bistatic radar observations of the moon (S-170) 

f. Gegenschein observation from lunar orbit (S-178) 

g. Lunar surface closeup photography (S-184) 

The pilot describing function experiment (T-029) was a success, in 
that data were obtained during manually controlled spacecraft maneuvers 


which are available to the principle investigator. None of the other 
experiments was attempted. 


13-1 


13.0 LAUNCH VEHICLE SUMMARY 


The Apollo 13 space vehicle was launched from pad A of complex 39, 
Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Except for the high-amplitude, low- 
frequency oscillations which resulted in premature cutoff of the S-II 
center engine, the basic performance of the launch vehicle was normal. 
Despite the anomaly, all launch vehicle objectives were achieved, as dis- 
cussed in reference 2. In addition, the S-IVB lunar impact experiment 
was accomplished, as discussed in section 11.3. 


The vehicle was launched on an azimuth 90 degrees east of north, 

and a roll maneuver at 12.6 seconds placed the vehicle on a flight azi- 
muth of 72.043 degrees east of north. Trajectory parameters were close 
to nominal during S-IC and S-II boost until early shutdown of the center 
engine. The premature cutoff caused considerable deviations from certain 
nominal launch-vehicle trajectory parameters which were particularly evi- 
dent at S-II outboard engine cutoff. Despite these deviations, the guid- 
ance system is designed to operate such that an efficient boost is con- 
ducted under engine-out conditions, and near~nominal trajectory parameters 
were achieved at orbital insertion and at translunar injection. Because 
of the reduced effective thrust, however, these respective events occurred 
44.07 and 13.56 seconds later than predicted. After spacecraft ejection, 
various S-IVB attitude and propulsive maneuvers placed the vehicle on a 
lunar impact trajectory very close to the desired target (section 11.3). 


Structural loads experienced during S-IC boost were well below design 
values, with maximum lateral loads approximately 25 percent of the design 
value. As a result of high amplitude longitudinal oscillations during 
S-II boost, the center engine experienced a 132-second premature cutoff. 
At 330.6 seconds, the S-II crossbeam oscillations reached a peak amplitude 
of +33.7g. Corresponding center-engine chamber pressure oscillations of 
+225 psi initiated engine cutoff through the "thrust OK" switches. These 
responses were the highest measured amplitude for any S-II flight. Except 
for the unexpected high amplitude, oscillations in this range are an in- 
herent characteristic of the present S-II structure/propulsion configura- 
tion and have been experienced on previous flights. Acceleration levels 
experienced at various vehicle stations during the period of peak oscil- 
lations indicate that the vehicle did not transmit the large magnitude 
oscillations to the spacecraft. Installation of an accumulator in the 
center-engine liquid oxygen line is being incorporated on future vehicles 
to decouple the line from the crossbeam, and therefore suppress any vibra- 
tion amplitudes. Addition of a vibration detection system which would 
monitor structural response in the 14-to-20 Hz range and initiate engine 
cutoff if vibrations approach a dangerous level is also under investiga- 
tion as a backup. 


13-2 


The pilot describing function experiment (T-029) was a success, in 
that data were obtained during manually controlled spacecraft maneuvers 
which are available to the principle investigator. None of the other 


experiments was attempted. 


14-1 


14.0 ANOMALY SUMMARY 


This section contains a discussion of the significant problems or 
discrepancies noted during the Apollo 13 mission. 


14.1. COMMAND AND SERVICE MODULES 


14.1.1 Loss of Cryogenic Oxygen Tank 2 Pressure 


At approximately 55 hours 55 minutes into the Apollo 13 mission, 
the crew heard and felt the vibrations from a sharp "bang," coincident 
with a computer restart and a master alarm associated with a main-bus-B 
undervoltage condition. Within 20 seconds, the crew made an immediate 
verification of electrical-system parameters, which appeared normal. 
However, the crew reported the following barberpole indications from the 
service module reaction control system: 


a. Helium 1 on quads B and D 
b. Helium 2 on quad D 


c. Secondary propellant valves on quads A and C. 


Approximately 2-1/2 minutes after the noise, fuel cells 1 and 3 
ceased generating electrical power. 


The first indication of a problem in cryogenic oxygen tank 2 occurred 
when the quantity gage went to a full-scale reading at 46 hours 40 minutes. 
For the next 9 hours, system operation was normal. The next abnormal in- 
dication occurred when the fans in cryogenic oxygen tank 2 were turned on 
at 55:53:20. Approximately 2 seconds after energizing the fan circuit, a 
short was indicated by the current trace from fuel cell 3, which was sup- 
plying power to the oxygen tank 2 fans. Within several additional seconds, 
two other shorted conditions occurred. 


Electrical shorts in the fan circuit ignited the wire insulation, 
causing pressure and temperature increases within oxygen tank 2. During 
the pressure rise period, the fuses opened in both fan circuits in cryo- 
genic oxygen tank 2. A short-circuit conduction in the quantity gaging 
system cleared itself and then began an open-circuit condition. When 
the pressure reached the tank-2 relief-valve full-flow conditions of 
1008 psia, the pressure decreased for about 9 seconds, after which time 
the relief valve probably reseated, causing another momentary pressure 
increase. Approximately 1/4 second after this momentary pressure in- 
crease, a vibration disturbance was noted on the command module acceler- 
ometers. 


1h-2 


The next series of events occurred within a fraction of a second 
between the accelerometer disturbances and a momentary loss of data. 
Burning of the wire insulation reached the electrical conduit leading 
from inside the tube to the external plug causing the tank line to burst 
because of overheating. The ruptured electrical conduit caused the vacuum 
jacket to over pressurize and, in turn, caused the blow-out plug in the 
vacuum jacket to rupture. Some mechanism, possibly the burning of in- 
sulation in bay 4 combined with the oxygen buildup in that bay, caused 
a rapid pressure rise which resulted in separation of the outer panel. 
Ground tests, however, have not substantiated the burning of the Mylar 
insulation under the conditions which probably existed just after the 
tank rupture. The panel separation shock closed the fuel cell 1 and 3 
oxygen reactant shut-off valves and several propellant and helium isola- 
tion valves in the reaction control system. Data were lost for about 
1.8 seconds as the high-gain antenna switched from narrow beam to wide 
beam, because the panel, when separating, struck and damaged one of the 
antenna dishes. 


Following recovery of the data, the vehicle had experienced a trans- 
lation change of about 0.4 ft/sec, primarily in a plane normal to bay 4. 
The oxygen tank 2 pressure indication was at the lower limit of the read~ 
out. The oxygen tank 1 heaters were on, and the tank 1 pressure was de- 
caying rapidly. A main-bus-B undervoltage alarm and a computer restart 
also occurred at this time. 


Fuel cells 1 and 3 operated for about 2-1/2 minutes after the re- 
actant valves closed. During this period, these fuel cells consumed the 
oxygen trapped in the plumbing, thereby reducing the pressure below mini- 
mum requirements and causing total loss of fuel cell current and voltage 
output from these two fuel cells. Because of the loss of performance by 
two of the three fuel cells and the subsequent load switching by the crew, 
numerous associated master alarms occurred as expected. 


Temperature changes were noted in bays 3 and 4 of the service module 
in response to a high heat pulse or high pressure surge. Fuel cell 2 was 
turned off about 2 hours later because of the loss of pressure from cryo- 
genic oxygen tank 1. 


The cryogenic oxygen tank design will be changed to eliminate the 
mechanisms which could initiate burning within the tank and ultimately 
lead to a structural failure of the tank or its components. All electri- 
cal wires will be stainless-steel sheathed and the quantity probe will be 
made from stainless steel instead of aluminum. The fill-line plumbing 
internal to the tank will be improved, and a means of warning the crew of 
an inadvertent closure of either the fuel cell hydrogen or oxygen valves 
will be provided. A third cryogenic oxygen tank will be added to the 
service module for subsequent Apollo missions. The fuel cell oxygen 


14-3 


supply valve will be redesigned to isolate polytetrafluoroethylene- 
coated wires from the oxygen. Warning systems at the Mission Control 
Center will be modified to provide more immediate and visible warnings 
of anomalies in all systems. 


A more thorough discussion of this anomaly is presented in refer- 
ence l. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.1.2 Postlanding Vent Valve Malfunction 


During postlanding activities, recovery personnel discovered that 
the postlanding ventilation inlet valve was closed and the exhaust valve 
was open. 


The ventilation valve is opened by first pulling the postlanding vent 
valve unlock handle. The handle is attached by a cable to two pins which 
mechanically lock the ventilation valves closed. Once the handle is pull- 
ed, the postlanding vent fan switch is placed to either the high or low 
position. This operation opens both ventilation valves and actuates the 
postlanding blower. The recovery forces found the switch setting to be 
proper, but the vent valve unlock handle was partially out instead of 
completely out. 


The inlet valve locking pin was not in the full open position 
(fig. 14-1), a condition which would keep the valve in the closed posi- 
tion even though both the pin and slot were measured to be within design 
tolerances. 


A check of the operation of the valves with different pull positions 
of the handle from locked to full open requires about one inch of travel 
and was made with the following results: 


a. With the handle extended only 1/4 inch or less from the valve 
locked position, both plungers remained locked. 


b. With the handle extended from 5/16 to 3/8 inch from the valve- 
locked position, the exhaust valve opened but the inlet valve remained 
closed. This condition duplicates that of the position of the handle and 
the operation of the valve found on the Apollo 13 spacecraft after flight. 


c. When the handle was extended from 3/8 inch to full travel from 
the valve-locked position, both the inlet and and exhaust valves opened. 


Testing verified that application of power to the valves while the 
locking pins are being released will prevent the pin from being pulled 
to the unlock position because the drive shaft torque binds the lock pin. 


14-4 


NASA-S-70-5841 


Handle 
15 pounds maximum force to pull from 
"tock" to "unlock" detent positions 








Unlocked 
position 





Valve motor 
drive shaft 


Locked 
position 





Plunger 
t travel 


0.25 inch 







Found not 
fully retracted 


0.942 inch 


Maximum handle 
travel 


Figure 14-1.- Post~landing vent valve lock. 


The valve-lock mechanism rigging tolerances were found to be within speci- 
fications. When reassembled in the spacecraft, the malfunction was dupli- 
cated with only partial travel of the handle. 


The ventilation system was designed with two flexible control-cable 
assemblies linked to one handle, which is pulled to operate the two valves. 
An inherent characteristic of this design is that one control cable will 
nearly always slightly lag the other when the handle is pulled. At full 
extension of the handle, the travel in each cable assembly is more than 
sufficient to disengage both plungers and allow both valves to operate. 
Checkout procedures prior to flight were found to be satisfactory. There 
was no evidence of mechanical failure or malfunction nor were any out- 
of—tolerance components found. 


14-5 


To guard against operational problems of this type in the future, a 
caution note has been added in the Apollo Operations Handbook to actuate 
the ventilation valve handle over its full travel before switching on the 
postlanding vent fan. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.1.3 Shaft Fluctuations in the Zero Optics Mode 


Beginning at approximately 40 hours, fluctuations of as much as 
0.3 degree were observed in the computer readout of the optics shaft 
angle. The system had been powered up throughout the flight and had 
been in the zero optics mode since the star/horizon navigation sightings 
at 31 hours. Crew observation of the manual readout subsequently con- 
firmed that the fluctuation was actually caused by motion of the shaft. 
The circumstances and time of occurrence were almost identical to a sim- 
ilar situation which occurred during the Apollo 12 mission. 


A simplified schematic of the optics shaft servo loop mechanization 
is shown in figure 14-2. In the zero optics mode, the sine outputs of 


NASA-S- 70-5842 


2 speed 
switch 
















1/2x 
resolver 









Feedback 
compensation 





I 
Zero optics 


Coupling Computer 
data unit ey 


Figure 14-2.- Zero optics mode circuitry. 


14-6 


the half-speed and 16-speed resolvers are routed through a coarse/fine 
switching network to the motor drive amplifier and are used to null the 
system. Rate feedback from the motor tachometer is routed to the drive 
amplifier through a compensation network which removes any bias in the 
Signal. When the zero optics mode is selected, the coupling-data-unit 
counter and the computer register which contains the shaft angle are 
zeroed for 15 seconds and then released to follow the 16-speed resolver. 
The half-speed resolver, the fine/coarse switching network, and the tach- 
ometer feedback compensation are used only in the zero optics mode. 


An investigation conducted after Apollo 12 did not identify a defi- 
nite source of the problem, since extreme corrosion from sea water after 
landing prevented meaningful examination of the mechanical drive system 
and restricted testing to the power and servo assembly which contains the 
major electronic components. No abnormal indications were found in the 
Apollo 12 system; however, the failure symptoms were reproduced on a 
breadboard by breaking down the isolation across a transformer in the 
tachometer feedback compensation network. Although depotting and testing 
of the actual transformer failed to produce any evidence of malfunction, 
this mechanism was considered a likely candidate for a random failure. 


The recurrence of the problem under almost identical circumstances 
during Apollo 13 indicates that the cause is more likely generic than 
random and that it is time or vacuum dependent. The susceptibility of 
the shaft axis rather than the trunnion axis also tends to absolve com- 
ponents common to both axes, such as the electronics and the motor drive 
amplifier. The shaft loop has been shown to be more sensitive than the 
trunnion to harmonics of the 800-hertz reference voltages introduced into 
the forward loop; however, because the level of the required null offset 
voltage is well above that available by induction, this mechanism is con- 
sidered unlikely. 


The most likely candidate is the half-speed resolver, which is used 
only for the shaft axis and only to provide an unambiguous zero reference. 
The reference voltage is applied to the rotor through slip rings 
(fig. 14-3), connected as shown in figure 14-4. If any resistance is 
present in the common ground path through the slip ring, a portion of the 
reference voltage will appear across the quadrature winding and induce a 
finite output (different than zero). Zero output is equivalent to zero 
degrees in shaft rotation. 


Simulated changes in slip ring impedance were made on the half-speed 
resolver in the shaft loop (fig. 14-4). An impedance of 50 ohms produced 
an offset of approximately plus 0.5 degree in sextant shaft angle. The 
trunnion loop does not use this type of resolver or connection. 


Some evidence of susceptibility to vacuum was exhibited in this 
class of resolvers during qualification testing when variations of approx- 
imately 5 ohms were observed in the slip ring resistance during thermal 


14-7 


NASA-S-70-5843 







Typical brush 
assembly 


Full-size half 


Slip ring/ brush speed resolver 


assembly 


Figure 14-3.- Details of half speed resolver. 


14-8 


NASA-S-70-5844 


Fe pee eer eg Pag eg pg a eg ig ge Oe 






[ 
l 
| 
l 













Excitation 
coil 


— Slip ring 


28 volts reference 
800 hertz 









Quadrature 
coil 





om a ew we we ww ss we ot 


Figure 14-4.- One-half speed resolver. 


vacuum testing. The tests were run with the units rotating at 1 rpm, 
however, and the momentary resistance changes disappeared with the wiping 
action. 


The testing of the half-speed resolver with resistance in the low 
side of the sine winding and the vacuum susceptibility exhibited during 
qualification testing closely duplicate the characteristics of inflight 
"Zero optics" operation. The slip-ring mechanism is unique to the shaft- 
axis, since none of the other resolvers in the system use slip rings. 

This resolver is in the optics head, which is vented to a vacuum. The 
rotation of the optics head in a normal operation would wipe the slip 
rings clean and explain the delay in the fluctuations for some hours after 
selecting zero optics. 


14-9 


Corrective action to high resistance on the brush/slip rings of the 
resolver is not required since accurate zeroing is unaffected and there 
is no effect in the operation of the system other than system readout 
when not in use. This condition can be expected to recur in future Apollo 
flight. Future crews will be briefed on this situation. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.1.4 High-Gain Antenna Acquisition Problem 


Prior to the television transmission at approximately 55 hours, 
difficulty was experienced in obtaining high-gain antenna acquisition 
and tracking. The Command Module Pilot had manually adjusted the antenna 
settings to plus 23 degrees in pitch and 267 degrees in yaw, as requested 
by the ground 7 hours earlier. The most favorable settings for 55 hours 
were actually plus 5 degrees in pitch and 237 degrees in yaw. The dif- 
ference between these two sets of angles pointed the antenna boresight 
axis approximately 35 degrees away from the line of sight to the ground 
station. 


When the transmission was switched from the omnidirectional antenna 
to the manual mode of the high-gain antenna, there was a 6 dB decrease in 
uplink signal strength and a 17 dB decrease in downlink signal strength. 
With the high-gain antenna in the wide beam mode and nearly boresighted, 
the uplink and downlink signal strengths should have been at least equal 
to the signal strength obtained with an omnidirectional antenna. A com- 
parison of the wide-, medium-, and narrow-beam transmit and receive pat-- 
terns indicates the high-gain antenna mode was in a medium-beam, manual 
mode at the time of acquisition and remained in this configuration until 
the reacquisition mode was selected at 55:00:10. 


Starting at 55:00:10 and continuing to 55:00:40, deep repetitive 
transients approximately every 5 seconds were noted on the phase modula- 
ted downlink carrier (fig. 14-5). This type of signature can be caused 
by a malfunction which would shift the scan-limit and scan-limit-warning 
function lines, as illustrated in figure 14-5. These function lines 
would have to shift such that they are both positioned between the antenna 
manual settings and the true line of sight to earth. Also, the antenna 
would have to be operating in the auto-reacquisition mode to provide these 
signatures. The antenna functions which caused the cyclic inflight RF 
Signatures resulting from a shift in the function lines can be explained 
with the aid of figures 14-5 and 14-6, with the letters A, B, C, and D 
corresponding to events during the cycle. Starting at approximately 
55:00:10, the antenna was switched from manual to auto reacquisition with 
the beamwidth switch in the medium-beam position. From point A to the 
scan limit function line just prior to point B, the antenna acquired the 
earth in wide beam. When the antenna reached the scan limit function 
line, the antenna control logic would switch the system to the manual 


14-10 


NASA-S-70-5845 





AML, 
YY 
ee, 





Pitch, deg 


Manual setting A 
itch 23°, yaw 267° : 
[tees | 


Shifted scan 


limit function Scan limit warning 


Hole function 




















180 210 240 270 300 330 0 30 60 90 120 150 180 
Yaw, deg 





Figure 14-5.- Shift in scan-limit, scan-limit-warning illustrated. 


mode and drive back toward the manual settings until the scan limit warn- 
ing function line at point C was reached, thereby maintaining wide-beam 
operation. When the antenna reaches the scan limit warning function line, 
the system would automatically switch to the medium-beam mode and con- 
tinue to drive in the manual mode until the manual setting error was 
nulled out at point A. The antenna would then switch to the autoe-track 
mode and repeat the cycle. The most important feature of this cycle is 
that the antenna moves at the manual scan rate between points B and D, 
which is confirmed by the rapid changes in the downlink signal strength. 


System testing with a similar antenna and electronics box showed RF 
signatures comparable to those observed in flight. This consistercy was 
accomplished by placing the target inside the scan limits and the manual 
setting outside the scan limits. These two positions were separated ap- 
proximately 35 degrees, which matched the actual angular separation ex- 
perienced. Under these conditions, the antenna cycled between the target 
and the manual setting while operating in the auto-reacquisition mode and 
produced the cyclic RF signature. Since the inflight loss of signal to 
earth was not near the scan limit, the failure mechanism would be a shift 
in the scan-limit function line. 


Elements in the scan-limit and scan-limit-warning circuit were 
shorted and opened to determine the effect on the scan-limit shift. The 





























mel ae a4 + e os Bn See 
| [ Note: Time is is thal “recorded at the Gokistone eral station 3 ht 
it ! and is not corrected for transmission time. 


bie pe 























55.00.20 pe es 
i Tem ae ‘Time, nrminesec 





Figure 14-6.- Recorded signal strengths during 
high-gain antenna operation. 


results of this test shifted the scan-limit functions but did not produce 
the necessary change in the scan-limit slope. Consequently, a failure in 
the electronic box is ruled out. 


The only component identified with a failure mode that would produce 
a shift in the scan-limit functions and a shift change is the C-axis ine 
duction potentiometer located in the antenna. This potentiometer is used 
to provide a voltage proportional to the C-axis angular orientation and 
consists of three separate coils, each with symmetrical winding on oppo- 
site sides of the rotor or stator. These coils include the primary wind- 
ing on the stator, the compensation or bias winding on the stator, and 
the linear output winding located on the rotor. The bias winding is used 
to shift the normal +70 degrees linear output to anew linear output over 
the range of from minus 10 to plus 130 degrees. 


The voltages for the C-axis induction potentiometer and the A-axis 
function generator, also located in the antenna, add together in the 


14-12 


electronic box and trigger the antenna logic to produce the scan-climit 
functions when the voltage sum reaches a threshold value. Under normal 
operating conditions, the threshold voltage is reached when the C-axis 
angular travel is between 95 and 115 degrees. 


The failure mode of the C-axis induction potentiometer is a short 
in the stator excitation winding. Shorting one half of the stator's 
primary winding to ground would produce a greater slope in the curve 
showing the induction potentiometer transformation ratio versus angular 
travel. This slope increase would produce nonlinear effects because the 
magnetic flux is concentrated in one-half of the primary winding. Fur- 
ther analysis is in progress to establish the particular failure and what 
might have caused the condition. 


A test will be performed at the launch site on future spacecraft to 
preclude launching with either a bad C-axis or A-axis generator. 


An anomaly report will be published when the analysis is complete. 


This anomaly is open. 


14.1.5 Entry Monitor System 0.05g Light Malfunction 


The entry monitor system 0.05g light did not illuminate within 3 
seconds after an 0.05g condition was sensed by the guidance system. The 
crew started the system manually as prescribed by switching to the back- 
up position. 


The entry monitor system is designed to start automatically when 
0.05g is sensed by the system accelerometer. When this sensing occurs, 
the 0.05g light should come on, the scroll should begin to drive, and the 
lrange-to-go counter should begin to count down. The crew reported the 
light failure but were unable to verify whether or not the scroll or 
counter responded before the switch was manually changed to the backup 
mode. 


The failure had to be in the light, in the 0.05g sensing mechanism, 
or in the mode switch, mode switching could also have been premature. 


An enlarged photograph of the scroll was examined in detail to de- 
termine if the scroll started properly. While no abnormal indications 
were observed, the interpretation of these data is not conclusive. 


A complete functional test was performed and the flight problem 
could not be duplicated. The system was cold soaked for 7 hours at 
30° F. While the system was slowly warming up, continuous functional 


14-13 


tests were being performed to determine if thermal gradients could have 
caused the problem. The system operated normally throughout all tests. 


Following verification of the light and sensing circuit, the mode 
switch was examined in detail. Tests were performed to determine con- 
tact resistance, arid the switch was examined by X-ray for conductive 
contaminants and by dissection for nonconductive contaminants. No evi- 
dence of any switch problems was indicated. 


The extensive testing and analyses and the consistency with which 
the postflight test data repeated preflight acceptance test results in- 
dicate the problem was most likely caused either by the Command Module 
Pilot responding too quickly to the 0.05g light not coming on or by an 
intermittent hardware failure that cleared itself during entry. 


Based on these findings, a change is not warranted to existing pro- 
cedures or hardware on future flights. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.1.6 Gas Leak in Apex Cover Jettison System 


During postflight inspection, it was discovered that propellant gas 
had leaked from the gusset-4 breech assembly, which is a part of the apex 
cover jettison system (fig. 14-7). A hole was burned through the alum- 
inum gusset cover plate (fig. 14-8), and the fiberglass pilot parachute 
mortar cover on the parachute side of the gusset was charred but not 
penetrated. The leakage occurred at the breech-plenum interface 
(fig. 14-9). The breech and plenum are bolted male and female parts 
which are sealed with a large O-ring backed up with a Teflon ring, as 
shown in figure 14-7. During operation, the breech pressure reaches 
approximately 14 000 psi and the gas temperature exceeds 2000° F. The 
O-ring and backup ring were burned through and the metal parts were 
eroded by the hot gas at the leak path. The system is completely re- 
dundant in that either thruster system will effect apex cover jettison. 
No evidence of gas leakage existed on the previous firings of 56 units. 


The possible causes of the gas leakage include: 


a. Out of tolerance parts - Measurement of the failed parts indi- 
cate acceptable dimensions of the metal parts. 


b. Damaged O-rings - The 21 000-psi static proof-pressure test was 
successful. 


ec. Gap in backup ring - The installation procedure specifies the 
backup ring may be trimmed on assembly to meet installation requirements , 


14-14 
NASA-S-70-5847 





Thruster 
“assemblies 
of - 


Figure 14-7.- Apex cover jettison system. 


but does not specify any dimensional control over the scarf joint. 


Since the gap portion was burned away, a gap in the backup ring could 
have caused the problem. 


Material and dimensional controls and improvement of assembly pro- 
cedures will minimize the possibility of gas leakage without necessitat-— 
ing a design change. However, to protect against the possibility of 
leaking gas with the existing design, a thermal barrier of polyimide 


14-15 


NASA-S-70-5848 


Hole in aluminum: 
gusset cover: plate 





Figure 14-8.- Damage from apex jettison thruster. 


NASA -S-70-5849 








Figure 14-9.- Plenum side of breech-plenum interface. 


14-16 


sheet (fig. 14-10) will be applied to the interior of the breech plenum 
area on future spacecraft. The protection provided by the polyimide has 
been proof-tested by firing the assembly without the O-ring, simulating 
a worst-case condition. 


This anomaly is closed. 


NASA-S-70-5850 


0.04-inch polyimide 
backed by aluminum plate 


0.04-inch polyimide Gusset 
backed by 0.031-inch Inconet Laruetet Ss \ 





pt 


Breech-plenum a Gusset 


Phenolic support assembly Two | ebat 
wo layer 


0.04-inch polyimide 


Figure 14-10.- Tunnel gusset protection. 


14.1.7 Reaction Control Isolation Valve Failure 


During postflight decontamination of the command module reaction 
control system, the system 1 fuel isolation valve was found open when 
it should have been closed. All other propellant isolation valves were 
in the closed position. The subsequent failure investigation revealed 
that the lead from the fuel valve closing coil was wired to an unused 
pin on a terminal board instead of to the proper pin. X-rays of the 
terminal board and closeout photographs indicate the miswiring occurred 
during initial installation. 


The miswired valve (fig. 14-11) passed the functional checks during 
buildup and checkout because, even with the closing coil lead completely 
disconnected, the valve can be closed through an inductive coupling with 
the oxidizer-valve closing coil. That is, a reverse-polarity voltage can 
be generated in the oxidizer valve opening coil through a "transformer" 


14-17 


NASA-S-70-5851 







28 V dc power 


Reaction control propellant switch 


Open 
valves 


Close 
valves 







|Current flowing in the close coil of the | 
oxidizer valve induces reverse voltage | 
in the open coil. The induced voltage 
lis coupled to the open coil of the fuel 
| valve and causes the fuel valve to close. 









Oxidizer 





sf Open circuit as a resuit 
of miswiring to wrong pin 


Figure 14-11.- Isolation valve circuit. 


action. This voltage is applied to the fuel valve opening coil where it 
induces a magnetic field flux that closes the fuel valve. With 28 volts 
or more on the spacecraft bus, this phenomenon was consistently repeat-— 
able. With 24 to 28 volts on the bus, the valve would occasionally close, 
and with less than 24 volts, the valve would not close. Since preflight 
testing is accomplished at 28 volts, the functional tests did not dis- 
close the miswiring. During the mission, the voltage was such that the 
valve did not close when commanded and therefore was found open after the 
flight. 


Certain components are wired into the spacecraft wiring harness by 
inserting crimped, pinned ends of the wiring into terminal boards of the 
spacecraft harness. In many cases, this wiring is part of closeout in- 
stallations and circuit verification can only be accomplished through 
functional checks of the component. This anomaly has pointed out the 
fact that circuits verified in this manner must be analyzed to determine 
if functional checks provide an adequate verification. All circuits 
have been analyzed with the result that the service module and command 
module reaction control system propellant isolation valves are the only 
components which require additional testing. Resistance checks will be 


14-18 


performed on all future spacecraft to prove that the isolation valves 
are properly wired. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.1.8 Potable Water Quantity Fluctuations 


The potable water quantity measurement fluctuated briefly on two 
occasions during the mission. At about 23 hours, the reading decreased 
from 98 to 79 percent for about 5 minutes and then returned to a normal 
reading of approximately 102 percent. Another fluctuation was noted at 
about 37 hours, at which time the reading decreased from its upper limit 
to 83.5 percent. The reading then returned to the upper limit in a period 
of 7 seconds. 


Preflight fluctuations of from 2 to 6 percent near the full level 
were observed once during the countdown demonstration test, and a pos- 
sible earlier fluctuation of about 4 percent at the half-full level was 
noted during the flight readiness test. 


This transducer has operated erratically on two previous missions. 
Testing after Apollo 8 traced the failure during that mission to moisture 
contamination within the transducer. Similar fluctuations noted during 
Apollo 12 were traced to a minute quantity of undetermined contamination 
on the surface of the resistance wafer. Characteristically, the signal 
level decreased first to indicate an increase in the resistance but re- 
turned to more normal readings as the wafer cleaned itself. Disassembly 
of the Apollo 13 transducer and water tank did not produce evidence of 
either contamination or corrosion. The spacecraft wiring which could 
have produced the problem was checked and no intermittents were found. 


The measurement is not essential for flight safety or mission suc- 
cess. The potable water tank is continually refilled with fuel cell pro- 
duct water, and when the potable water tank is full, fuel cell product 
water is automatically diverted to the waste water tank, which is period- 
ically dumped overboard. Water from the potable water tank is used mainly 
for drinking and food reconstitution. Since fuel cell water generation 
rates can be computed from power generation levels and since potable 
water usage rates can be estimated with reasonable accuracy, the quantity 
of water in the potable water tank can be determined with acceptable 
accuracy without the quantity measurement. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14-19 


14.1.9 Suit Pressure Transducer Failure 


During launch the suit pressure transducer reading remained consist- 
ent with cabin pressure until 00:02:45, then suddenly dropped from 6.7 
to 5.7 psia coincidentally with S-II engine ignition (fig. 14-12). The 
difference between the two measurements decreased to only 0.2 by 1-1/2 
hours, when the cabin reached its nominal regulated pressure of 5.0 psia. 
For this shirtsleeve mode, the suit and cabin pressure readings should 
be nearly equal. During normal variations in the command module cabin 
pressure, the suit pressure measurement responded sluggishly and indicated 
as much as 1 psi low. Subsequently, the measurement output decayed and 
remained in the 4.1 to 4.3 psia range for a cabin pressure of 5.0 psia 
until system deactivation at about 59 hours (fig. 14-12). 


NASA-S -70-5852 





as | 
t 


leer easel 

© Command module cabin 

-——}- pressure 

O Suit pressure 
|_| | J 
lel isle : : (mee 
| ke ‘ 
| | | | | 
S-IC engine cutoff fo engine ignition | \ 
| H i i 
oo 5 | 









































wa 
vt 






Pressure, psia 
oo 













































































az t 7 
9 :20 40 1:20 1:40 2:00 2:40 3:00 3:20 3:40 4:00 


Time, min:sec 


(a) Lift-off through 4 minutes. 


Figure 14-12.- Suit and cabin pressure. 


14-20 


NASA-S-70-5853 









«3 4.6 
oY) 
Qa. 
o 
5 
wn 
wn 
a 
a 4.2 
3.8 O Command module cabin pressure 
A Lunar module cabin pressure 
OC) Suit pressure 
ee a le (se 


58:00 58:20 58:40 59:00 
Time, hr:min 
(b) 58 through 59 hours. 
Figure 14-12.- Continued. 
During periods when the lunar module and the command module cabins 


were interconnected, the lunar module and command module cabin pressure 


readings were approximately equal, verifying the operation of the command 
module cabin pressure transducers. 


14-21 


NASA-S-70-5854 













oCommand moduie cabin 
pressure : 
O Suit pressure 


14 














Pressure, psia 


























Time, hr:min 


(c) 142:45 through 142:56 hours. 
Figure 14-12.- Concluded. 


The suit measurement indicated correctly during the brief instru- 
mentation power-up periods at 102 and 123 hours. However, just prior to 
entry, the suit indication was approximately 0.3 psi lower than cabin 
pressure but increased to 7.7 psia when the cabin pressure was reading 
13.9 psia just prior to landing. 


This transducer also behaved erratically on Apollo 12. Postflight 
analysis of both the Apollo 12 and Apollo 13 transducers determined the 
cause to be internal contamination from electroless nickel plating 
particles. 


The transducer is a variable reluctance instrument actuated by 
differential pressure applied across a twisted Bourdon tube. The housing, 
including the cavity containing the Bourdon tube and the variable reluc- 
tance elements, is nickel plated. The Bourdon tube-variable reluctance 


14-22 


assembly and the sense port fitting are soldered in place. Inspection 
of the failed units indicates that the flaking occurs adjacent to the 
solder. ‘ 


The most probable cause of the problem is poor plating adhesion to 
the aluminum base metal. Differential expansion between the solder and 
the aluminum may cause the plating to crack. Moisture from the environ- 
mental control system suit loop could then penetrate the plating, corrode 
the aluminum base metal and cause the plating to peel and flake. The 
nickel flakes could then enter the air gap of the variable reluctance 
elements and affect the measurement. 


Inspection also revealed that both the cabin and suit loop pressure 
transducers contained various contaminants identified as solder flux, 
glass beads (0.04 mm diameter), and fibers from the wipers used in the 
transducer manufacturer's clean room; all of which could potentially 
affect the transducer operation. 


To assure that one of the pressure transducers is operative, the 
Apollo 14 cabin pressure transducer will be disassembled, the plating 
will be inspected and the instrument will be cleaned, reassembled and 
installed. 


For Apollo 15 and subsequent, the suit and cabin pressure transducers 
will be disassembled and cleaned. The plating will be inspected for 
cracking or flaking and the units will be reassembled. The suit pressure 
transducers will be reassembled without soldering. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.1.10 Gas Leak in Electrical Circuit Interrupter 


During postflight inspection of the command module, propellant gas 
was noted to have escaped from the left-hand electrical circuit inter- 
rupter, mounted in the lower equipment bay, and deposited soot on adja- 
cent equipment. The right-hand circuit interrupter showed no evidence 
of a gas leakage. The removed breech, showing the displaced O-ring and 
crushed attenuator block, is shown in figure 14-13. 


The two interrupters open the electrical circuits about 30 milli- 
seconds before the wires are severed by the command module/service module 
umbilical guillotine. As illustrated in the figure, a cam fork is moved 
by a piston, which is operated by propellant gas from redundant cartridges, 
to function a lift plate. Motion of this plate disconnects the male and 
female portions of electrical connectors located, respectively, in the 
lift plate and in the base plate of the interrupter. At the completion 
of the stroke, the fork is brought to rest by impacting and crushing an 
aluminum block mounted on the interrupter housing. 


Sip canccnteamnceas 


“Toitieerentes 

















_ O-ring 


Figure 14-13.- Circuit interrupter. 


14-23 


14-24 


The worse-case tolerance buildup is when the fork contacts the 
attenuator block and the piston O-ring is 0.075 inch from entering the 
chamfer in the breech assembly. The O-ring enters this chamfer when 
the block has been crushed about 94 percent, at which point an O-ring 
displacement and accompanying gas escape could be expected. The factors 
which affect the degree of attenuator crushing are generally uncontrol- 
lable within narrow limits and include: 


a. Sliding friction of the many electrical contact pins, the 
several camming and fork-to-plate surfaces, and the piston 


b. Forces exerted by the springs, which hold the lift and base 
plates together in the assembled position 


c. Propellant gas pressure and the simultaneous increase of pres- 
sure in the two breeches and the plenum 


d. Simultaneous occurrence of the electrical firing signals to 
the two cartridges 


e. Physical properties of the attenuator block. 


Based upon an analysis of the interrupter design, its location, 
and its relationship to adjacent equipment, it is concluded that gas 
will not escape prior to the completion of the deadfacing function and 
that, should such escape occur, the gas will not adversely affect any 
other components. Therefore, no hardware modification is necessary. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.2 LUNAR MODULE 


14.2.1 Abnormal Supercritical Helium Pressure Rise 


During the’ initial cold-soak period following loading of supercrit- 
ical helium during the Apollo 13 countdown demonstration test, the helium 
exhibited a pressure rise rate approximately three times greater than ex- 
pected. A preflight test was devised to determine the pressure-rise rate 
that would exist at the time of descent engine firing for lunar descent. 
The predicted tank conditions at that time would be approximately 900 psia 
pressure and 48 pounds of helium. Normal procedures were not used to 
reach 900 psia because 100 hours would have been required and the launch 
schedule would have been impacted; therefore, the pressure was raised to 
900 psia by flowing warm helium through the tank heat exchanger. The sub- 
sequent pressure rise rate was abnormally high at 14.9 psi/hour. The ab- 
normality of this rate was confirmed by repeating the test on two other 


14-25 


helium tanks, one at the manufacturer's plant and the other at the Manned 
Spacecraft Center. The results indicated pressure rise rates of 8.8 and 
8.7 psi/hour, respectively. 


The heat-leak test during the countdown demonstration indicated a 
normal rise rate of 7.9 psi/hour at 640 psia, whereas the special test 
showed an abnormal rise rate of 14.9 psi/hour above 900 psia. At some 
helium temperature equivalent to a pressure between 640 and 900 psia, the 
rise-rate characteristics would increase in the manner exhibited during 
the countdown demonstration test. Extrapolating these results to the 
flight conditions, it was determined that the helium tank was fully cap- 
able of supporting a lunar landing timeline, and the decision was made to 
proceed with the flight using the existing tank. 


The prelaunch-standby rise rate was a normal 7.8 psi/hour. During 
flight, the zero-g rise rate of 7 psi/hour was slightly higher than ex- 
pected, but still satisfactory. Following the first descent engine fir- 
ing at 61-1/2 hours, the rise rate increased to 10.5 psi/hour, rather 
than returning to its normal value, as shown in figure 14-14. After the 
second firing at 79-1/2 hours, the rise rate again increased, this time 
to approximately 33 psi/hour until about 109 hours, when the helium-tank 
burst disc ruptured at 1937 psia, as it should have and vented the remain- 
ing helium overboard. 


The helium tank is a double-walled titanium pressure vessel, with 
173 layers of aluminized Mylar insulation between the two shells. The 
annular region is evacuated to a level of 10°” torr during the manufac- 
turing process. 


The most likely cause of the anomaly is a tank-insulation degrada- 
tion which would result in increased heat conduction to the helium. The 
insulating characteristics of the annular vacuum in tank was most likely 
degraded by the introduction of a contaminant (probably hydrogen) in ex- 
tremely small concentrations (approximately 10 6 pounds). These contam- 
inants when vaporized can exponentially increase the thermal conductivity 
in proportion to their vapor pressure, as indicated by special tests. 
While loading helium into the tank, the contaminants would freeze upon 
the inner shell. In the frozen state, the pressure of the contaminant is 
too low to significantly affect the thermal conductivity. However, the 
flow check which preceded the cold-soak operation would vaporize the con- 
taminants in the vicinity of the heat exchanger lines which pass through 
the annulus. The subsequent increase in thermal conductivity could cause 
the abnormally high pressure-rise rate observed during the cold soak. 
These vapors would slowly condense on the cold (10° R) inner wall, re- 
sulting in the pressure rise rate droping to the nominal level, as was 
observed. The rise rate would remain normal until the helium temperature 
increased above the vaporization temperature of the contaminant. 


14-26 


NASA-S-70-5856 


. Burst disk venting 
aud at 108:54:20 






1600 - 
Pressure drop after 
second descent engine 
firing because of partial 
helium depletion 
1200 IF 
os Pressure rise after 
ee first descent engine 
= firing because of 
= conduction from heat 
“ exchanger into tank 
2 800 |- al 
see -6 Note: There was no effect 
_ Cabin sesaaun on helium pressure after 
—_ the third descent engine 
_ firing because the tank 
~ was isolated by valve 
400 fF = - closure. 
Launch 


0 12 24 36 48 60 72 84 96 108 120 
Time, hr 


Figure 14-14.- Inflight profile of supercritical 
helium tank pressure. 


A screening test was devised for all future flight tanks to supple- 
ment normal helium tank testing. The purpose of this test is to deter- 
mine the pressure rise rate for a wide range of helium temperatures from 
approximately 9° to 123° R. For a perfect tank, the steady-state.rise 
rate should remain at approximately 8 psi/hour over the entire range of 
temperatures. The Apollo 14, 15, and 16 tanks have been subjected to the 
screening test, and each exhibit the same phenomena observed during 
Apollo 13, but to a lesser degree. For new tanks, the manufacturer will 
periodically analyze the gases removed from the vacuum jacket during pump 
down for possible contaminants. The pressure in the jacket will be mea- 
sured 2 or 3 weeks after pumpdown to verify vacuum integrity. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14-27 


14.2.2 Abnormal Descent Stage Noise 


At 97 hours 14 minutes, the crew reported a thumping noise and snow- 
flakes venting from quadrant 4 of the lunar module descent stage (fig. 14-15). 
All four descent batteries experienced current transients at 97:13:53 for 
about 2 seconds, with corresponding drops in de bus voltage (fig. 14-16). 
Also, the water glycol pressure differential for the heat transport sys- 
tem decreased momentarily, indicating that the glycol pump momentarily 
slowed down. 







NASA-S~70-5857 


Battery 2 — 
Battery control assembly 


A 


Battery 1 





Figure 14-15.- Descent stage battery location. 


14-28 


NASA-S -70-5858 






































points for clarity and do not re- 
flect the ac ual measurement 
values between the data points 





Note: Lines are connected between data 7—— 























cel 








VA 























0 



































c=) 
CN 


abeyjon ‘sng abeyon ‘sng sasadwe ‘yp Asayjeg  sasadwe ‘g Auayeg = savadwe ‘7 AJayeg sadadwe “T Auayeg 
S, 4apuewwoy $,JO[!0 ajnpow seuny 


SE Ss ES EN PEED CE) AS 


Boer PnP aa 





Time, hr:min:sec 


Figure 14-16.- Battery electrical transients. 


14-29 


The thumping noise occurred at about the same time as the current 
spikes. The current spikes show that a momentary short circuit existed 
in the Lunar~Module-Pilot side of the de electrical system, which includes 
descent batteries 1 and 2 (fig. 14-16). The current surge was not of 
sufficient duration either to open the balance-load cross-tie circuit 
breakers, to display a reverse current indication, or to trip a battery- 
off relay as a result of an overcurrent condition. 


The data show that descent battery 2 experienced at least a 60-ampere 
current surge. This condition could have been a reverse current into the 
battery, since the instrumentation system does not indicate the direction 
of current. Immediately after the current surges, battery 1 current re- 
turned to its original value while battery 2 provided about 80 percent of 
the total current load. After sustaining a surge load, the battery termi- 
nal voltage normally increases for a short period of time. Since battery 2 
experienced the highest surge, it should have temporarily assumed the most 
load. Within 10 minutes all batteries were properly sharing the current 
load, and no subsequent abnormal performance was observed. At 99:51:09, 
battery 2 gave an indication of a battery malfunction, discussed in more 
detail in the next section. 


Evidence indicates that battery 2 may have experienced an electrical 
fault of some type. The most probable condition is electrolyte leaking 
from one or more cells and bridging the high-voltage or low~voltage ter- 
minal to the battery case (fig. 14-17). This bridging results in water 
electrolysis and subsequent ignition of the hydrogen and oxygen so gener- 
ated. The accompanying "explosion" would then blow off or rupture the 
seal of the battery lid and cause both a thump and venting of the free 
liquids in the battery case, resulting in "snowflakes." 


Postflight tests have shown the following: 


a. Electrolyte can leak past the Teflon retention screens installed 
in each cell to prevent leakage. 


b. The descent battery cells contain an excessive amount of free 
electrolyte. 


c. The potting does not adhere to the battery case, consequently, 
any free electrolyte can readily penetrate the interface between the 
potting and the case and bridge between the terminals and case. 


d. Once an electrolyte bridge is formed, electrolysis will produce 
hydrogen and oxygen gas. 


e. A bridge at the positive terminal can produce a current surge of 
as much as 150 amperes. 


14-30 
For Apollo 14 and subsequent missions, the descent batteries will be 


modified to minimize the hazards associated with electrolyte leakage. 


NASA-S-70-5859 


sat 





Cell 






R y) Possible 
Ad electrolyte 
yy bridge 


Figure 14-17.- Descent battery terminal configuration. 


The battery potting will be improved to prevent electrolyte bridging 
between the battery terminals and case. These improvements include coat- 
ing the inside of the battery case with epoxy paint before the battery is 
assembled and changing the potting material used at the ends of the case 
to a material which has better adhesion characteristics. Also, the cell 
chimneys will be manifolded together and to the case vent-valve with 
plastic tubing. 


In addition, tests are being performed to determine if the quantity 
of free electrolyte in each cell can be reduced. Preliminary results in- 
dicate a reduction of from 360 to 340 ce per cell is possible. 


14-31 


The designs of other Apollo batteries have been reevaluated, and all 
are considered safe except the lunar module ascent batteries and the lunar 
surface drill battery. The ascent batteries and a new battery to be in- 
stalled in subsequent service modules will receive the same corrective 
action applied to the descent battery. The lunar surface drill battery, 
which previously was unpotted, will be potted. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.2.3 Descent Battery 2 Malfunction Light On 


The battery malfunction light illuminated at about 100 hours with a 
corresponding master alarm. The malfunction, isolated to battery 2, could 
have been caused by an overcurrent, a reverse-current condition, an over- 
temperature condition, or possibly an erroneous indication. The logic 
for these malfunction conditions is shown in figure 14-18. 


NASA-S-70-5860 







Electrical control assembly 





Location of 
possible shorts 


to On 


Battery 


To master alarm 
and caution faght 








Bimetallic 
ternperature 
switches 







Closed when battery Closes with Closes with 
is on the bus reverse Current over current 


Auxiliary relay 





co 


Battery fault 
fight 


Battery 10 o3 


OO 04 


Power’ temperature 
monitor switch 


Figure 14-18.- Battery 2 malfunction circuit. 


A battery overcurrent can be ruled out because automatic removal of 
the battery from the bus would have occurred. 


14-32 


A reverse-current condition can be ruled out because, if the battery 
is removed from and reapplied to the bus, the reverse-current circuit has 
a built-in delay of about 5 seconds before the reverse-current relay is 
again activated to illuminate the light. Battery power was removed from 
and replaced on the bus in flight, and the light immediately illuminated 
again when the battery was reconnected. 


An over-temperature condition can be ruled out because, after the 
battery was replaced on the bus, the light remained illuminated for a 
brief period and then began flickering intermittently. A flickering 
light cannot be caused by the temperature sensing switch because of a 
temperature hysteresis of approximately 20° F in the switch. The water 
glycol loop temperature also indicated that the battery temperature was 
normal. 


Either a short between the temperature switch wires to ground or a 
contamination in the auxiliary relay would actuate the light. The shorted 
condition could have resulted from electrolyte shorting within the battery 
case associated with the current surges discussed in the previous section. 
Contamination of the auxiliary relay has occurred in the past, and relays 
already packaged were not retrofitted since a false over-temperature indi- 
cation can be identified as it was here. : 


Corrective action is being taken to prevent electrolyte shorts as- 
sociated with the previously discussed battery anomaly which should elim- 
inate this type of sensor problem in future spacecraft. No further cor- 
rective action to eliminate contamination in the auxiliary relay is re- 
quired. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.2.4 Ascent Oxygen Tank 2 Shutoff Valve Leak 


During the flight, the pressure in the ascent stage oxygen tank 2 
increased, indicating a reverse leakage through the shutoff valve from 
the oxygen manifold (fig. 14-19) into the tank. The leak rate, with a 
maximum differential pressure of 193 psi, varied from about 0.22 lb/hr 
(70 000 sec/hr) to zero when the tank pressure reached manifold pressure. 
Allowable leakage for the valve in either direction is 360 scc/hr. Pre- 
flight test data indicate a reverse leakage of 360 scc/hr and no exces- 
sive leaking in the forward direction. 


The internal portion of three valves of this type had been replaced 
previously on the spacecraft because of excessive leakage through the 
ascent oxygen tank 1 shutoff valve. In one valve, a rolled O-ring 


14-33 


NASA-S-70-5861 










Ascent 
oxygen 
no. 2 


To suit loop 









i Pressure Pressure 7 | 
a x regulator regulator K a y +—Leaking 
\/ = A B = = valve 
K Eee ee Z 
= Manifold Z z 
2S OE POE 
z z Cabin vy, 
\/ \/ repressurization——wef="4- 
af ; 
Quick : 
HK disconnect : \ te aa z 
Portable \ Burst oxygen) 
life support | Overboard —— diaphragm 
system relief = 
recharge <q 
Paix 








Descent 
oxygen 


High [¢ 

pressure 

regulator VY 
iN 


Figure 14-19.- Oxygen-supply system. 


(fig. 14-20) caused the leakage. When the valve is installed, the for- 

ward O-ring can be rolled and damaged when it passes the manifold port. 

In the other two valves, the cause was not identified and was assumed to 
be contamination. 


The production tolerances of the valve and bore were examined to 
determine if a tolerance buildup problem existed. The manufacturer's 
specification to which the valve was designed requires that the O-ring 
be subjected to a compression of between 0.0115 and 0.0225 inch, whereas 
the O-ring supplier recommends between 0.011 and 0.017 inch. The added 


14-3h 


NASA-S-70-5862 








O-ring could have been 
damaged during installation 
by chamfered edge 


ANN 
aes | 








High pressure from 
oxygen tank 





mie i © 
Witte Ig LL deE QE: 








Valve seat could 
have been contaminated 


Actuating 
handle 


Figure 14-20.- Ascent stage tank shutoff valve. 


compression allowed in the valve design would aggravate the tendancy for 
the O-ring to roll during valve assembly. 


Leak tests previously performed on the valve were inadequate, in 
that only reverse leakage at high pressure was determined. For future 
vehicles, forward and reverse leakage at both high and low pressures 
will be measured to detect any defective valves. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.2.5 Cracked Window Shade 


The left-hand window shade showed three large separations when it 
was first placed in the stowed position during flight (fig. 14-21). A 
Beta Cloth backing is stitched to the inner surface of the Aclar shade. 
The cracks propagated from the sewing stitch holes on the periphery of 
the shade. About 1/8-inch-long cracks extended from about 80 percent 
of the stitch holes in a direction parallel with the curl axis of the 


shade. 


‘14-35 


-70-5863 


-S 


NASA 

















Figure 14-21.- Cracked left-hand window shade. 


14-36 


Cracking as a result of Aclar embrittlement has occurred before, 
therefore, the Apollo 13 shades were examined prior to flight. Since 
no cracks were found, the shades were approved for flight. 


The Aclar supplier has developed a heating and quenching process 
to provide material with an elongation in excess of 25 percent, as com- 
pared to elongations of from 6 to 12 percent for the failed shades. 
Shades for future vehicles will be fabricated from this more ductile 
material. The Aclar will be reinforced with Mylar tape before the Beta 
Cloth backing is stitched to the shade. The modified shades have been 
requalified for the next flight. 


This anomaly is closed. 
14.3 GOVERNMENT FURNISHED EQUIPMENT 


14.3.1 Loose Lens Bumper On Lunar Module 16-mm Camera 


For launch, the 16-mm camera is mounted to point through the Lunar 
Module Pilot's window with the 10-mm lens and bumper attached. At the 
time of inflight lunar module inspection, the bumper was found to have 
separated from the camera lens. The bumper was replaced and remained 
attached for the remainder of the flight. Looseness has been experi- 
enced during previous lens/bumper assemblies. 


To prevent recurrence of the problem, the mating surface of the 
bumper will be swaged for future missions so as to provide an interfer- 
ence fit with the internal surface threads of the 10-mm lens assembly. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14.3.2 Failure of the Interval Timer Set Knob 


The onboard interval timer, which has two timing ranges (0 to 6 and 
0 to 60 minutes), is stowed in the command module for crew use in timing 
such routine functions as fuel cell purges, cryogenic system fan cycles, 
and so forth. A tone advises the crew when the set time period has 
elapsed. Prior to 55 hours, the time-period set knob came off in a crew- 
man's hand because of a loosened set screw. The set screw had been se- 
cured with a special gripping compound. Postflight examination of other 
flight timers indicated that this compound apparently does not provide 
a strong enough retention force for this application. Therefore, the 
knobs on timers for future flights will be secured to the shaft with a 
roll pin. 


This anomaly is closed. 


14-37 


14.3.3 Improper Nasal Spray Operation 


When attempts were made to use the two nasal spray bottles in the 
command module medical kit, no medication could be obtained from one 
bottle and only two or three sprays could be obtained from the other. 

On previous flights, there had been a tendency for the spray to be re- 
leased too fast, therefore a piece of cotton was inserted in the 9-cc 
pottle to hold the 3 ce of medication. Chamber tests and ambient shelf- 
life tests have indicated that this change was satisfactory. Those tests 
have also shown that, for best results, the bottle should be squeezed 
where the cotton is located. Postflight examination of the one returned 
bottle demonstrated satisfactory operation under normal gravity. The 
returned bottle still contained 2.5 cc of medication after five or six 
test sprays. 


Medical kits for future flights will include nose drops packaged 
the same as the eye drops. This packaging has been satisfactory on pre- 


vious flight for eye drops. 


This anomaly is closed. 


15-1 


15.0 CONCLUSIONS 


The Apollo 13 mission was the first in the Program requiring an 
emergency abort, with the Gemini VIII mission the only prior case in 
manned spaceflight where a flight was terminated early. The excellent 
performance of the lunar module systems in a backup capacity and the 
training of both the flight crew and ground support personnel resulted 
in the safe and efficient return of the crew. The following conclusions 
are drawn from the information contained in this report. 


a. The mission was aborted because of the total loss of primary 
oxygen in the service module. This loss resulted from an incompatibility 
between switch design and preflight procedures, a condition which, when 
combined with an abnormal preflight detanking procedure, caused an in- 
flight shorting and a rapid oxidation within one of two redundant storage 
tanks. The oxidation then resulted in a loss of pressure integrity in 
the related tank and eventually in the remaining tank. 


b. The concept of a backup crew was proven for the first time when 
3 days prior to flight the backup Command Module Pilot was substituted 
for his prime-crew counterpart, who was exposed and susceptible to 
rubella (German measles). 


c. The performance of lunar module systems demonstrated an emer- 
gency operational capability. Lunar module systems supported the crew 
for a period approximately twice their intended design lifetime. 


d. The effectiveness of preflight crew training, especially in con- 
junction with ground personnel, was reflected iin the skill and precision 
with which the crew responded to the emergency. 


e. Although the mission was not a complete success, a lunar flyby 
mission, including three planned experiments (lightning phenomena, earth 
photography, and S-IVB lunar impact), was completed and information which 
would have otherwise been unavailable, regarding the long-term backup 
capability of the lunar module, was derived. 


APPENDIX A - VEHICLE DESCRIPTIONS 


The configuration of the Apollo 13 spacecraft and launch vehicle 
was nearly identical to that of Apollo 12, and the spacecraft/launch 
vehicle adapter and launch escape system underwent no changes. The few 
changes to the command and service modules and the lunar module are dis- 
cussed in the following paragraphs. A discussion of the changes to the 
Apollo lunar surface experiments package and a listing of the spacecraft 
mass properties are also presented. 


A.1 COMMAND AND SERVICE MODULES 


The structure in the forward end of the docking tunnel was rein- 
forced to accommodate the expected higher parachute loads due to the in- 
creased weight of the command module. In the sequential system the timing 
signal which disables the roll engines during service module separation 
was changed from a 5.5- to a 2-second interval, and a cutoff time of 
25 seconds was incorporated for the translation engines instead of allow- 
ing them to fire until the propellant was depleted. These timing changes 
were instituted to minimize the effects of fuel slosh and to improve 
service-module separation characteristics. The stripline units in the 
high-gain antenna were changed to an improved design. A detachable filter 
was provided for installing over the cabin heat exchanger exhaust to assist 
in collection of free lunar dust after crew transfer from the lunar module. 
An extra urine filter, in addition to the primary and backup units, was 
stowed and could be used to reduce the possibility of a clogged urine trans- 
fer line. Also included was a lunar topographic camera, which could be 
installed in the command module hatch window for high resolution photog- 
raphy of the lunar surface from orbit. The camera provided a 4.5-inch 
film format and had an 18-inch focal length and image-motion compensation. 
The photographs would yield a resolution of approximately 12 feet and 
would include a 15-mile square area on the surface for each frame exposed. 


A.2 LUNAR MODULE 


The thickness of the outer-skin shielding for the forward hatch was 
increased from 0.004 to 0.010 inch to improve the resistance to the tear- 
ing that was noted on Apollo 12. The D-ring handle on the modularized 
equipment storage assembly was changed to a looped cable to simplify the 
deployment operation. The thermal insulation for the landing gear was 
modified to reduce the total insulation weight by 27.2 pounds. Both a 
color and a black-and-white television camera were included for increased 


reliability of television coverage on the lunar surface. The primary 
guidance programs were modified to permit reentry into the automatic and 
attitude hold modes of operation after manual control was exercised; this 
change was incorporated to provide improved final descent capability in 
the event of obscuration from lunar dust. The event timer was modified 
so that after it counted down to zero, it would count up automatically 
and thus reduce crew workload during critical events. The descent pro- 
pulsion system was changed to include a bypass line around the fuel/helium 
heat exchanger such that if the heat exchanger should freeze during vent-— 
ing, pressures would equalize on both sides of the heat exchanger. The 
sensing point for the water separator drain tank was changed from the 
location of the carbon dioxide sensor to a point upstream of the suit 
fans, thus eliminating migration of water to the carbon dioxide sensor 
and improving its operation. A removable flow limiter was added to the 
inlet for the primary lithium hydroxide cartridge to reduce the water 
separator speed and to minimize the possibility of condensed water in 

the suit. A dust filter was incorporated at the inlet of the cabin fan 
to reduce the amount of free lunar dust in the cabin. Redesigned water/ 
glycol and oxygen disconnects having redundant seals were installed to 
improve reliability and to permit up to 5 degrees of connector misalign- 
ment. To decrease the possibility of lunar dust contamination, a brush 
was added for cleaning the suits before ingress, the bristles on the 
vacuum brush were changed from Teflon to Nylon, and a cover was added to 
the lunar sample tote bag. 


The extravehicular mobility unit underwent several modifications to 
improve lunar surface capability. Scuff patches were added to the pres- 
sure garment assembly to prevent wear of the thermal/meteoroid garment 
caused by chaffing of the lunar boots. A device was added in the neck 
area of the pressure suit to provide drinking water to the crewmen during 
extravehicular activity. A center eyeshade was installed at the top of 
the extravehicular visor assembly to reduce incoming glare and to aid in 
dark adaptation when entering shadow. Abrasion cover gloves were included 
to be used over the extravehicular gloves to reduce wear and heat conduc- 
tion during core drilling operations. The electrical connnector on the 
remote control unit for the portable life support system was redesigned 
to permit easier engagement. The manufacturing technique for the regu- 
lator in the oxygen purge system was modified to minimize the possibility 
of gas leakage. 


A.3 EXPERIMENT EQUIPMENT 


The Apollo lunar surface experiment package stowed for Apollo 13 
was Similar to that for Apollo 12. However, the solar wind spectrometer, 
magnetometer, and suprathermal ion detector, included on Apollo 12, were 


A-3 


deleted from Apollo 13. A heat flow experiment and a charged particle 
environment detector were added for Apollo 13. The cold-cathode ion gage 
experiment deployed during Apollo 12 was significantly modified for 
Apollo 13. 


The Apollo lunar surface experiments package consisted of two sub- 
packages as shown in figures A-l and A-2. These were stowed in the lunar 


module scientific equipment bay. 


NASA-S-70-5864 






Fuei transfer tool 


Dome removal tool -7 


Antenna mast sections ee 
r~ Universat 
\E te tools 


Carrier 
assembly 









Paliet and radioisotope 
thermoelectric generator 
(depioyed) 











Passive seismic 
experiment stool 













Apotio lunar land Loais 
(deployed) 






Structure/ thermal subsystem components 


Figure A-1.- Experiment subpackage number 1. 


A.3.1 Heat Flow Experiment 


The heat flow experiment was designed to measure the thermal gradient 
of the upper 3 meters of the lunar crust and the thermal conductivity of 
the lunar surface materials. Lunar heat flow calculations could be based 
on the measurements. 


The experiment consisted of an electronics package and two sensor 
probes which were to be placed in bore holes, predrilled by the crew using 
the Apollo lunar surface drill. At each end of the probe was a gradient 
heat sensor with heater coil, a ring sensor 10 centimeters from each end, 
and four thermocouples in the probe cable. The probe consisted of two 
55-centimeter sections joined at a 2-inch spacing with a flexible spring. 


A-4 


NASA-S-70-5865 














aiming 
detector “mechanism 








lunar environment 
experiment (deployed) 





Central 
station 
p 










Passive seismic experiment 
(deployed) 











Sunshield 
Side 
curtain 








gy 
Curtain . 
retawier 

Side 
curtain 

Reflector 






Heat flow 
Thermal piate (mounting experinient 
central ; 
station 
electronics) 
Boom 
attachment Cold cathode 
assembly gage experiment 
(deployed) 





Primary 
structure 


Structure/thermal subsystem components 


Figure A-2.- Experiment subpackage number 2. 
A.3.2@ Charged Particle Lunar Environment Experiment 


The charged particle lunar environment experiment was designed to 
measure the energy of protons and electrons in the energy range of 40 to 
70 electron volts. The experiment consisted of two detector/analyzer 
packages, each oriented for minimum exposure to the eclystic path of the 
sun, one for the east-west plane and one for the north-south plane. Each 
of the detector packages had six particle energy detectors. A complete 
measurement of all energy ranges would be made every 19.4 seconds. 


A.3.3 Cold Cathode Gage Experiment 


The cold cathode gage experiment was designed to measure the density 
of the lunar atmosphere by sensing the particle density immediately around 
its deployed position. An electrical current would be produced in the 
gage proportional to particle density. Pressure of the ambient atmosphere 
could be calculated, based on the measurements of the density of the 
neutral atoms. 


The experiment consisted of an electronics package with sunshield 
and reflector, to shade the thermal plate from the direct sunlight, and 
a sensor package with aperture and dust cover. 


A=3 


A.4 LAUNCH VEHICLE 


Spray foam was used exclusively as insulation in the S-II stage to 
reduce weight. A fourth battery was installed in the instrument unit to 
extend the tracking capability to lunar distance in support of the S-IVB 
lunar impact experiment. Telemetry measurements in the inertial platform 
were added and, in some cases, were relocated to provide a more complete 
analysis of platform vibrations. Four wires were added to the distributor 
in the emergency detection system, located in the instrument unit, to 
provide automatic ground command capability at spacecraft separation in 
the event of a contingency separation. 


A.5 MASS PROPERTIES 


Spacecraft mass properties for the Apollo 12 mission are summarized 
in table A-I. These data represent the conditions as determined from 
postflight analyses of expendable loadings and usage during the flight. 
Variations in spacecraft mass properties are determined for each signif- 
icant mission phase from lift-off through landing. Expendables usage is 
based on reported real-time and postflight data as presented in other 
sections of this report. The weights and centers of gravity of the in- 
dividual command and service modules and of the lunar module ascent and 
descent stages were measured prior to flight, and the inertia values were 
calculated. All changes incorporated after the actual weighing were mon- 
itored, and the spacecraft mass properties were updated. 





A-6 


TABLE A-I.- MASS PROPERTIES 


Se 


























2 Product of inertia, 
es Weight, Center of gravity, in. Moment of inertia, slug-ft slug-ft 
lb pean 
Tyx Tyy Tez Tyy | de | fz 
Lift-orf 110 252.4) 847.4 67 646 | 1 175 539 | 1 178 016 2906 | 8 Ob7 | 3711 
Earth orbit insertion 101 261.2 607.4 66 770 718 686 721 213 5157 | 945 3688 


Transposition and docking® 


Command & service modules} 63 720.3} 934.5 33 995 76 486 79 123 | ~1746 -126 | 3221 
Lunar module 33 499.1] 1237.0 22 4o7 2k 654 25 255 -434 95 235 
Total docked 97 219.4] 1038.7 56 736 534 890 538 009 | -8142 | -9376 | 3585 
First midcourse correction 
Ignition 97 081.5{ 1038.9 56 629 534 493 537 635 | -8192 | -9305 | 3620 
Cutoff 96 851.1] 1039.0 56 508 534 139 537 360 | -8189 | -9282 | 3587 
Cryozenic oxygen tenk 
incident 
Before 96 646.9{ 1039.2 56 321 533 499 536 766 | -8239 | -92hk | 3636 
After 96 038.7} 1040.7 57 2h8 533 927 537 251 | -8269 | -8993 |-3709 
Second midcourse correction 
Ignition 95 959.9] 378.8 5T 205 516 4h3 521 180 | 11617 2659 | 3286 
Cutoff 95 647.1] 379.4 57 006 513 919 518 700 | 11553 2651 | 3285 
Transearth injection? 
Ignition 95 42h.0] 379.7 56 866 512 837 517 560 | 11370 2495 | 3255 
Cutoff 87 456.0] 398.4 51 778 431 285 437 119 9443 2222 | 32h9 
Third midcourse correetion® 
Ignition 87 325.3] 398.7 51 681 430 123 435 930 92hu, 2048 | 3215 
Cutoff 87 263.3} 398.9 51 642 429 353 435 169 9227 2045 | 3215 
Fourth midcourse correction? 
Ignition 87 132.1} 399.1 51 553 428 322 434 105 9069 1911 | 3191 
Cutoff 87 101.5] 399.2 51 538 428 219 433 990 9065 1910 | 3192 
Conmand & service module 
separation” 
Before 87 057.3{ 399.3 51 517 428 065 433 819 9058 1909 | 3194 
After (command module/ 37 109.7} 251.5 24 048 92 418 93 89 | 2362 | -989 9 
lunar module ) 
Command module/lunar 
module separation® 
Before? 37 014.6} 252.9 23 926 93993] 95 51h | 2188] -963 | -35 
After (command module) 12 367.6} 1039.9 5 815 5 258 4 636 31 409 20 
Entry 12 361.4 | 1039.9 5 812 5 25h 4 635 31 -407 21 
Drogue deployment L 869.4} 1038.7 5 727 5 002 4 405 33 -382 au 
Main parachute deployment 11 579.8} 1038.6 5 590 4 B12 4 346 27 -319 ul 
Lending 1. 132.9 { 1036.6 5 526 4 531 4 Oh6 25 -328 ko 

















*Lunar module was docked to the command module from initial docking until just prior to entry. 


OMass properties are referenced to the coordinate system of the lunar module, which provided spacecraft dynamic 
control during these phases. 











APPENDIX B — SPACECRAFT HISTORIES 


The history of command and service module (CSM 109) operations at 
the manufacturer's facility, Downey, California, is shown in figure B-l, 
and the operations at Kennedy Space Center, Florida, in figure B-2. 


The history of the lunar module (LM-7) at the manufacturer's facil- 
ity, Bethpage, New York, is shown in figure B-3, and the operations at 
Kennedy Space Center, Florida, in figure B-4. 


NASA-S-70-5866 










December 














January 


Individual and combined 
systems checkout 


Bil integrated systems test 


Modifications and retest are a 
Final installation and checkout J (| fj | 


Weight and balance | 









Prepare for shipment and ship Dal 





Figure B-l.- Checkout flow for command and service modules 
at contractor's facility. 


B-2 


NASA-S-70-5867 


1969 1970 


[ tonst_[semier[ oeeser [vavnter] econo | senany [Febuny | noch [ami 
aa | | a | Baa Spacecraft operation and checkout 


i Spacecraft/ launch vehicle assembly 


| | | ieee Systems tests on pad 


Propellant loading and leak tests 


Countdown demonstration test eri 


Note: Command and service modules Countdown [i 
delivered to Kennedy Space Center Caneh Vv 
on June 25, 1969. 





Figure B-2.- Command and service module checkout 
history at Kennedy Space Center. 


NASA-S-70-5868 


1968 1969 


|| Bl 2 a | Bil Component installation and testing 
ine ee ot ee = Leak checks and functional tests 
Rework and verification tests es ae 


Final installation me <1] 


Weight and balance ] 


Final inspection || 


Prepare for shipment and ship | 





Figure B-3.- Checkout flow for lunar module at 
contractor's facility. 


NASA-S-70-5869 


1969 | 1970 


October | November | December | January February March April 


B-3 





Sas Equipment installation and retest 


il Landing gear installation 
| a Install in spacecraft/ launch vehicte adapter 
a | | System verification tests 
i BB Fina pad rework and retest 
if | Load propellants 


Countdown demonstration test | i 


Countdown 
Note: Lunar module delivered to 


Kennedy Space Center Launch W 
on June 27, 1969. 





Figure B-4.- Lumar module checkout history at 
Kennedy Space Center. 


a 
bh 


APPENDIX C_ — POSTFLIGHT TESTING 


The command module arrived at the contractor's facility in Downey , © 
California, on April 27, 1970, after reaction control system deactivation 
and pyrotechnic safing in Hawaii. Postflight testing and inspection of 
the command module for evaluation of the inflight performance and inves- 
tigation of the flight ‘irregularities were conducted at the contractor's 
and vendors' facilities in accordance with approved Apollo Spacecraft 
Hardware Utilization Requests (ASHUR's). The tests performed as a result 
of inflight problems are described in table C-I and discussed in the ap- 
propriate systems performance sections of this revort. Tests being con- 
ducted for other purposes in accordance with other ASHUR's and the basic 
contract are not included. 


TABLE C-I.- POSTFLIGHT TESTING SUMMARY 


ASHUR Purpose Tests performed Results 





Environmental Control 








109007 To determine containinates present Analyze the oxygen filters 
or damage incurred in 900 psi upstream of restrictors and 
system check valves for contaminates. 


Perform acceptance test of 
oxygen ir. air regulator 


109006 To determine contaminates present Withdraw sample and analyze for No sigrificant difference 
in residual oxygen in surge tank contaminates from tise analysis per- 
end repressurization package formed at \-ading 

10901 To investigate tre failure of the Determine position of inlet vaive Not complete 
postlanding ventilation valve to mechanical safety pin. Attempt 
cycle open to operate valve, ther remove 


for failure analysis 


199020 Ts cetermine the cause of failure Perform calibration check, dis- Not complete 
of the suit pressure transducer assembly, and failure ana*ysis 

199021 To determine the cause of failure Remove, disassemble, and per-- Not complete 
vf the potaole water transducer form failure analysis 


Guidance and Navigatior: 


109015 To investigate the cause for optics Performance check of zero optics Unable to perform tests on 
coupling display unit indications mode operation optical unit due to salt 
of optics movement. during the water contamination 


zero optics mode 


109018 To investigate the failure of the Verify the 0.652 entry monitor Not complete 
@.c5g indication during entry system circuit, check the :con- 
nectors, lame, and wiring 





APPENDIX D - DATA AVAILABILITY 


Tables D-I and D-II are summaries of the data made available for 
systems performance analyses and anomaly investigations. Table D-I lists 
the data from the command and service modules, and table D-II, for the 
lunar module. For additional information regarding data availability, 
the status listing of all mission data in the Central Metric Data File, 
building 12, MSC, should be consulted. 


TABLE D-I.- COMMAND AND SERVICE MODULE DATA AVAILABILITY 


Bandpass a Gay 
Bete Bilevelg | Computers | O'graph isrush ee special 
or tabs words records records Pe proerams 
















Time, hr:min 
Range 


station 








> 
= 
mS 





Q 
K 
H 
<< Kx KX 


~~ XN X 





>< >< >< KOK OK OOK 








~~ 





~~ xX NX 


= 
wn 
2] 
2 
OS KOK OK OK OOK OK OK OK OKO OK OK OK OK OKO OK OKO 
~ 


PS >< OOK OOK OOK OOK OOK OK OOK OOK OOK OOK KOK OKO OKO OKO 
~ 





ra 
ww 
HO 
> 
AX 
~~ X 





> 
bs) 
a 
> 
x 
<< &< 














D~2 


TABLE D-II.- LUNAR MODULE DATA AVAILABILITY - Concluded 






























Time, hr:min Range sasha ea en Computer | 0'graph Brush Special Special 
From To station oe tabs exe words records records paieen programs 
57:57 58:05 GDS x X x 
57:57 60:36 MSFN xX Xx x 
58:12 59:12 GDS x x X 
60:36 64:50 MSFN xX x x 
61:10 62:10 GDS x x x xX X x Xx 
64:52 68:26 MSFN x x 
65:07 66:07 HSK x 
68:26 72:2h MSFN x x 
2:32 77:03 MSFN X x 
17:03 80:29 MSFN X x X 
78:47 79:47 GDS X x x X X X x 
80:29 96:29 MSFN x x 
93:30 93:40 MAD x x 
94:56 95:05 MAD X 
96:29 | 100:33 MSFN x xX 
97:11 97:18 MAD X X X 
97:12 97:18 ACN XxX: 
99:24 99:57 cps X x x X 
99:50 | 100:24 GDS x x 
100:33 | 104:57 MSFN X | X 
101:00 | 101:07 GDS X 
104:19 | 105:19 GDS X X x 
104:57 | 108:36 MSFN x x X 
105:15 | 105:53 cDs X X x x X 
108:36 | 112:35 MSFN x X 
108:52 | 109:06 GDS K 
109:12 | 109:25 GDS x x X 
112:35 | 120:28 MSFN X X 
117:33 | 120:3h MAD x x 
102:28 } 136:52 MSFN x x x 
133:46 | 134:39 GDS x 
134:20 | 135:20 HSK x 
136:30 | 136:50 HSK x 
136:52 | 136:3 MSFN X X x 
137:14 | 138:14 HSK x x x x x X 
138:34 | 142:38 MSFN X x 4 
141:25 | 141:35 CRO X 
141:28 | 141: 32 GWM X x X x X x 








APPENDIX E - MISSION REPORT SUPPLEMENTS 


Table E-I contains a listing of all supplemental reports that are 
or will be published for the Apollo 7 through Apollo 13 mission reports. 
Also indicated in the table is the present status of each report not 
published or the publication date for those which have been completed. 


TABLE E-I.- MISSION REPORT SUPPLEMENTS 


Supplement 
number 


Publication 
date/status 


Apollo 7 


Title 


Trajectory Reconstruction and Analysis 

Communication System Performance 

Guidance, Navigation, and Control System 
Performance Analysis 

Reaction Control System Performance 

Cancelled 

Entry Postflight Analysis 


Apollo 8 


Trajectory Reconstruction and Analysis 

Guidance, Navigation, and Control System 
Performance Analysis 

Performance of Command and Service Module 
Reaction Control System 

Service Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Analysis of Apollo 8 Photography and 
Visual Observations 

Entry Postflight Analysis 


Apollo 9 


Trajectory Reconstruction and Analysis 
Command and Service Module Guidance, Navi- 
gation, and Control System Performance 
Lunar Module Abort Guidance System Perform- 
ance Analysis 

Performance of Command and Service Module 
Reaction Control System 

Service Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Performance of Lunar Module Reaction Control 
System 

Ascent Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Descent Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Cancelled 

Stroking Test Analysis 

Communications System Performance 

Entry Postflight Analysis 


May 1969 
June 1969 
November 1969 


August 1969 


December 1969 
December 1969 
November 1969 
March 1970 
September 1970 
December 1969 
December 1969 
November 1969 
November 1969 
November 1969 
April 1970 
December 1969 
Final review 


December 1969 


September 1970 


December 1969 
December 1969 
December 1969 





Supplement 
number 


TABLE E-I.- MISSION REPORT SUPPLEMENTS - Continued 


Apollo 10 


Trajectory Reconstruction and Analysis 

Guidance, Navigation, and Control System 
Performance Analysis 

Performance of Command and Service Module 
Reaction Control System 

Service Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Performance of Lunar Module Reaction Control 
System 

Ascent Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Descent Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Cancelled 

Analysis of Apollo 10 Photography and Visual 
Observations 

Entry Postflight Analysis 

Communications System Performance 


Apollo 11 





Trajectory Reconstruction and Analysis 

Guidance, Navigation, and Control System 
Performance Analysis 

Performance of Command and Service Module 
Reaction Control System 

Service Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Performance of Lunar Module Reaction Control 
System 

Ascent Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Descent Propulsion System Final Flight 
Evaluation 

Cancelled 

Apollo 11 Preliminary Science Report 

Communications System Performance 

Entry Postflight Analysis 


Publication 
date/status 


March 1970 
December 1969 


Final review 
September 1970 
Final review 
January 1970 


January 1970 


In publication 
December 1969 
December 1969 
May 1970 
September 1970 
Review 
Review 

Review 
September 1970 
September 1970 
December 1969 


January 1970 
April 1970 





TABLE E-I.- MISSION REPORT SUPPLEMENTS - Concluded 


Publication 
date/status 


Apolio 12 


Trajectory Reconstruction and Analysis September 1970 

Guidance, Navigation, and Control System September 1970 
Performance Analysis 

Service Propulsion System Final Flight Preparation 
Evaluation 

Ascent Propulsion System Final Flight Preparation 
Evaluation 


Descent Propulsion System Final Flight Preparation 
Evaluation 

Apollo 12 Preliminary Science Report July 1970 

Landing Site Selection Processes Final review 


Apollo 13 


Guidance, Navigation, and Control System Review 
Performance Analysis 

Descent Propulsion System Final Flight Preparation 
Evaluation 

Entry Postflight Analysis Cancelled 





R-1 


REFERENCES 


Manned Spacecraft Center: Apollo 13 Cryogenic Oxygen Tank 2 Anomaly 
Report. MSC-02545. June 1970. 


Marshall Space Flight Center: Saturn V Launch Vehicle Flight Evalua- 
tion Report AS-508 Apollo 13 Mission. MPR-SAT-FE-70-2. June 1970. 


Marshall Space Flight Center, Kennedy Space Center, Manned Spacecraft 


Center: Analysis of Apollo 12 Lightning Incident, MSC-01540. 
February 1970. 


ICSU/IUGG Committee on Atmospheric Sciences: Report of the Study 
Conference on the Global Atmospheric Research Program, 1967. 


Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, Vol. 50, No. 7: 


Cloud Height Contouring from Apollo 6 Photography, by V. S. Whitehead, 
I. D. Browne, and J. G. Garcia. 1969. 


Defense Supply Agency, Washington, D. C.: Military Standardization 
Handbook Optical Design, MIL HDBK~141. 1962. 


NASA Headquarters: Apollo Flight Mission Assignments. OMSF M-D MA 
500-11 (SE 010-000-1). October 1969. 


Manned Spacecraft Center: Mission Requirement, H-2 Type Mission 
(Lunar Landing). SPD9-R-053. November 10, 1969. 


NASA.— MSC — Coml., Houston, Texas 


APOLLO SPACECRAFT FLIGHT HISTORY 


(Continued from inside front cover) 


Mission Spacecraft Description Launch date Launch site 
Apollo 4 SC-017 Supercircular Nov. 9, 1967 Kennedy Space 
LTA-10R entry at lunar Center, Fla. 
return velocity 
Apollo 5 LM-1 First lunar Jen. 22, 1968 Cape Kennedy, 
module flight Fla. 
Apollo 6 SC-020 Verification of April 4, 1968 Kennedy Space 
LTA-2R closed-loop Center, Fla. 
emergency detection 
system 
Apollo 7% CSM 101 First manned flight; Oct. 11, 1968 Cape Kennedy, 
earth-orbital Fla. 
Apollo 8 CSM 103 First manned lunar Dec. 21, 1968 Kennedy Space 
orbital flight; first 
manned Saturn V launch 
Apollo 9 CSM 104 First manned lunar Mar. 3, 1969 Kennedy Space 
LM-3 module flight; earth Center, Fla. 
orbit rendezvous; EVA 
Apollo 10 CSM 106 First lunar orbit May 18, 1969 Kennedy Space 
LM~4 rendezvous; low pass Center, Fla. 
over lwar surface 
Apollo 11 CSM 107 First lunar landing July 16, 1969 Kennedy Space 
LM-5 Center, Fla. 
Apollo 12 CSM 108 Second lunar landing Nov. 14, 1969 Kennedy Space 
LM-6 Center, Fla. 
Apollo 13 CSM 109 Aborted during trans- April 11, 1970 Kennedy Space 
LM-7 lunar flight because Center, Fla. 


of cryogenic oxygen loss 


MISSION REPORT QUESTIONNAIRE 


Mission Reports are prepared as an overall summary of specific Apollo flignt 
results, with supplemental reports and separate anomaly reports providing tne 
engineering detail in selected areas. Would you kindly complete tnis one-page 
questionnaire so that our evaluation and reporting service to our readership night 
be improved, 


!., DO YOU THINK THE CONTENT OF THE MISSION REPORTS SHOLLO BEr 


Otess DETAILES O MORE DETAILED CD) sour THE SAME? 
2. WOULD YOU SUGGEST ANY CHANGES TO THE PRESENT CONTENT? 


» YOUR COPY tS (check more than ene), 


O READ COMPLETELY O READ PARTIALLY O SCANNEO O NOT READ OR SCANNET 





O ROUTED TO OTHERS QO FILED FOR REFERENCE C)otscanses CO) siven TO SOMEONE ELSE 
4. ON THE AVERAGE, HOW OFTEN OO YOU REFER LATER TO A “MISSION REPORT? 


O MORE THAN 5 TIMES O FROM 2 To 5 TIMES CJ once O NEVER 


« REGARDING REPORT SUPPLEMENTS, YOU: 


DJ use THOSE YOU RECEIVE’ O DO NOT RECEIVE ANY, SUT WOULD LIKE TO O D0 NOT NEED THEM 


6. DO YOU WISH TO CONTINUE RECEIVING MISSION REPORTS? 


OC) ves 0) no 


7. FURTHER SUGGESTIONS OR COMMENTS: 












ORGANIZATION ADORESS 





Please fold this form in half with the address on the outside, staple, and mail 
the form to me, Thank you for taking the time to complete this form. 


Donald D. Arabian, Chiet 
Test Division 


MSC Form 884 (May 70) 


NASA — MSC 


PLACE STAPLE HERE 


FOLO ALONG THIS LINE 


me ww mM ww & —& — oe em em = ow oe ee ee me ew ee ee ee ea a ee ee ee ee nw ee = = = = ee = = eo eo em MH mw ew ww ew ow = — = = ew we et 


NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND 
SPACE ADMINISTRATION 
Manned Spacecraft Center 

Houston, Texas 77058 


Official Business POSTAGE AND FEES PAID 
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND 
SPACE ADMINISTRATION 


NASA-Manned Spacecraft Center 
Houston, Texas 77058 


ATTNG PTe 


(office Symbol) 


